DISP 150 3 2002
Martina Koll-Schretzenmayr, Gabriela Burkhalter

The City: Backdrop of a Pleasure-Driven Society or 
Lasting Urban Pleasure Landscape?

Never before have so many people 
been able to fulfill so many of their 
dreams. Never before have we had so 
much time and so many opportunities to 
"live the life." One telling manifestation 
of this development is the fact that to­
day, 60 percent of traffic volume is as­
sociated with leisure activities. At the 
same time, never has the societal pres­
sure and imperative to "live the life" 
been so profound. Those who have no 
interesting job, no flashy car, no vaca­
tion to the South Pacific to tell about, no 
alternative health and fitness program 
are considered "out." Those who feel 
overwhelmed by the seemingly endless 
possibilities visit creative workshops or 
book "all-inclusive" trips in order to get 
themselves animated.

Gerhard Schulze, a sociologist from 
the University of Bamberg, concludes 
with regard to today's pleasure-driven so­
ciety [ 1 ] that the big sociocultural turning 
points of the second half of the 20th cen­
tury represent a transition from a status 
quo in which man was the subject of his 
world to one in which the world is the 
subject of man. "What has changed is 
above all one thing: the generally ac­
cepted relationship between the individ­
ual and the world. According to the old 
paradigm, the world was the given thing 
that the individual had to adjust to. In the 
new paradigm, the relationship has been 
turned upside down - if anything is still 
seen as given, it is the individual. This re­
orientation of the relationship between 
the world and the individual forms the 
basis of contemporary society." [2]

As a result of this change in para­
digm, an ever more powerful dynamic 
°f development has set in, and the num­
ber of opportunities at our disposal has 
increased dramatically. Nothing seems 
’mpossible anymore. Anything can be 
'magined and realized. Man is no 
longer satisfied with finding his place in 
° predetermined world, but rather de­
mands the right to choose his own 
'world. In the meantime, advertising and 
ircndsetting are ensuring that the selec­
tion of potential opportunities is still in­
creasing. The ruthless indicators of suc­
cess or failure such as stock quotes, mar- 
^et share, and global reach are becom­
ing the measure of all things.

Once again, the city has become the 
favored spot for those seeking to live the 
good life. Whereas the 1970s intro­
duced an era in which larger shopping 
and entertainment complexes were 
moved outside of the city, the 1990s 
have seen the city reemerge as the cen­
ter of pleasure seekers and consumers. 
Pleasure-driven society is purposefully 
settling in urban areas that offer more 
intensive stimulation than sterile mega 
discos in the countryside. Or can you 
imagine the love parade being held on 
the Woodstock site? The city is turning 
into the platform of the "fit-for-fun" soci­
ety. New urban pleasure landscapes 
are emerging, especially in former in­
dustrial areas previously not viewed as 
attractive from a cultural point of view. 
These invite the visitor to improvise, of­
fer a cheaper price niche, seem to offer 
potential surprises and guarantee the 
sought after thrill. A prominent Swiss ex­
ample is "Zurich West," Zurich's former 
industrial backyard between the central 
railway station and the Altstetten dis­
trict. In 1999, the Schauspielhaus, the 
city's theater, set up a stage in a former 
ship construction shed. Several re­
nowned art galleries have premises 
round the theater. A multiplex cinema 
and a musical theater are also nearby, 
in addition to a pulsating bar scene and 
countless night clubs to satisfy the "Sat­
urday Night Fever" of urban and subur­
ban youth. The pleasure-seeking culture 
of the fun-loving generation has clearly 
established itself in the former industrial 
district. This trend has emerged not only 
in Zurich: since the end of its industrial 
days, the "Sulzer-Areal Stadtmitte" in 
the city of Winterthur/Switzerland has 
also developed into a center for nightlife 
and leisure. The skating park located 
there draws visitors all the way from 
Germany and Austria. In many cities, 
one can find other examples of pleas­
ure-driven revitalization of former indus­
trial districts.

But how is the transformation of these 
districts into vibrant cultural districts to 
be assessed qualitatively? Are these dis­
tricts profiting from this development or 
are cities degenerating into nothing 
more than reflections of our pleasure- 
driven society? Indeed the negative par­

allel developments - traffic congestion, 
high noise levels among others - are a 
reality not to be ignored. Yet it is also ev­
ident that the new cultural and enter­
tainment landscapes are being used 
and enjoyed by all walks of society: the 
theater lover next to the disco teen, the 
art collector next to the cinema lover. All 
are present within these areas and the 
city is being used and rediscovered. In­
dustrial quarters formerly considered off 
limits - urban "terrae incognitae" - are 
turning into gathering points for urban­
ites and suburbanites. All the while, they 
are attracting investors and capital to 
the city. What more could we want?

Yet trends are short term in nature, 
and the task of urban and spatial plan­
ning is to create urban spaces that sur­
vive the short-term trends and facelifts 
that cities undergo. Cities and city ar­
chitecture can no longer be built for a 
span of three generations, but must be 
able to adapt flexibly to rapidly chang­
ing developmental trends and cycles. 
Quality with regard to city building, ar­
chitecture, traffic systems, and diversity 
of uses is therefore an investment for the 
future.

Translation: Martin Gahbauer, New Haven, CT

Notes/Anmerkungen

[1] Schulze, G. (1992): Die Erlebnisgesell­
schaft. Frankfurt/M.; Schulze, G. (1999): 
Die Kulisse des Glücks. Frankfurt/M.
[2] Schulze, G. (2000): Gesellschaft 2000: 
Was wird aus der Erlebnisgesellschaft? 
http://www.soziologie.uni-bamberg.de/ 
er2000.html

http://www.soziologie.uni-bamberg.de/


DISP150 10 2002

ihre eigene «Kultur» besitzen. Ausser­
dem wird sich auch Zürich West verän­
dern, wird seinen Umbruchcharakter 
verlieren. In einem nächsten Transforma­
tionsschub wird das Gebiet immer mehr 
Citycharakter annehmen. Mit allem, 
was dazugehört: hohen Boden- und 
Mietpreisen, knappen Flächen, fehlen­
den Parkplätzen. Entdecken die Kultur­
schaffenden und die ihnen stets folgen­
den Zeitgeistsurfer dann ein neues 
Transformationsgebiet?

Anmerkungen

[1] Deutsches Institut für Urbanistik: Beiträge 
zur Stadtforschung Nr. 25, Berlin 1998
[2] Stadt Zürich, Fachstelle für Stadtentwick­
lung (Hg.): Wegzüger und Zuzügerbefra­
gung Zürich, 1998/99
[3] Meier-Dallach Hans-Peter, Hohermuth Su­
sanne: Stadtkultur im Grossdorf Schweiz, 
NFP Stadt und Verkehr, Bericht Nr. 47, 
Zürich 1994
[4] www.erlebniscenter.de
[5] Hochparterre, Zürich: 1 1/1999
[6] TA Magazin 6,1998
[7] Stadt Zürich (Hrsg.): Stadtforum Zürich, 
Schlussbericht, Zürich 1997
[8] Morgenthaler, Jan: Transit 99 - Ein flüch­
tiger Sommer in Zürich, Zürich, 1999
[9] Stadt Zürich, Amt für Städtebau: Koope­
rative Entwicklungsplanung Zürich West, 
Synthesebericht, Zürich 1999
[10] Schweizerdeutsch für «Kneipenszene»

Brigit Wehrli-Schindler
Fachstelle für Stadtentwicklung der 
Stadt Zürich 
Stadthausquai 17 
Postfach
CH-8022 Zürich
brigit.wehrli@prd.stzh.ch

http://www.erlebniscenter.de
mailto:brigit.wehrli%40prd.stzh.ch