DISP 148 77 2002

port's potential for development with the 
challenges of businesses. The coopera­
tion between state entities and private 
enterprise has taken on particular mean­
ing largely due to the introduction of the 
Swiss Alpeninitiative. The survey of busi­
nesses in and around Zug confirmed 
that transport costs do not belong to the 
deciding criteria in business decisions - 
not even in the area of logistics. The rec­
ognized measures of supply-side eco­
nomics and free enterprise such as LSVA 
(flexible tax on road freight transporta­
tion) do not provide enough force. Be­
yond that, there is a need for coopera­
tive development - for example in joint 
shipping - which not only creates at­
tractive business conditions but also 
breaks down emotional barriers be­
tween rail transport, its competitors and 
customers.

4.2.3 Law
The need for a broad-based site concept 
for combined traffic is undisputed. Such 
a concept must be supported on various 
levels. On the national level, for exam­
ple, a new start was made at the begin- 
ning of 1999 with the legislative pro­
posal for rail reform. It is also possible 
to envision a federal plan on Rail Trans­
portation and Combined Transport In­
frastructure.

On the regional level, the basis of the 
canton's strategic traffic planning must 
be improved. As companies do not fit 
their activities to political borders, the 
canton has to create its bases for plan- 
n'ng on a transborder level. This leads 
to the question of whether a Swiss na­
tional development strategy for the cur­
rent environment is needed, to create a 
framework for this spatially variable co- 
°Peration of Swiss cantons.

based on the results of this project, we 
recommend that communities pursue 
more vigilantly the efficient use of space 
ln transport and traffic infrastructure in 
their plans. This becomes even more im­
portant as many key players in the Zug 
region consider traffic to be the "Motor 
°f City Development." The opportunities 
range from the elimination of certain site 
characteristics for newly-locating firms 

planning shutdowns for business rea­
sons or the application of cooperative

tools in the planning process. Thereby 
the state asks businesses to cooperate 
and provides these private entities with 
useful information. In this manner, com­
panies begin to learn the needs and mo­
tives of public offices. It is important that 
a regional level for cooperation is 
found. In the near future, the canton and 
communities of Zug must get closer to 
the customer than ever before and there­
fore closer to the needs of the economy 
and the general population.

4.2.4 Infrastructure
As the demand for intermodality of 
transport rises, a need for an appro­
priate physical infrastructure also arises. 
Business decisions on transport contain­
ers, transport methods and transport de­
pend on the network for joint trans­
portation being available. For example, 
at the Rotkreuz railway station the Zug 
region has a strategically favorable site 
whose infrastructure still needs develop­
ment.

Until now infrastructure policy was al­
ways one-sidedly based on supply: that 
is to say that when there was a traffic 
jam, it was counteracted by an expan­
sion of traffic infrastructure. Recently, 
availability and networking of functions 
such as working, living or shopping are 
being demanded locally. For that rea­
son, efforts are to be judged on the ba­
sis of their contribution to sustainable 
spatial development and their spatial 
and environmental effects.

4.2.5 "Software"
This term - in contrast to hardware - 
refers to the "soft infrastructure." What 
is needed first of all is information. As 
an example, few firms know that it is 
possible to get subsidies for investment 
in a works siding - provided by the 
Canton of Zug as a clean air measure. 
A first step toward overcoming this com­
munications deficit is the newly created 
Office for Long-term Promotion in the 
canton's Office for Economic Develop­
ment. Moreover, "software" also covers 
voting processes in logistics as well as 
the availability of knowledge and skills 
in the region. In this area, deciding fac­
tors stem from spatial planning and site 
policy.

The administration's proximity to the 
customer should not be restricted to busi­
ness. On the one hand, nontrans­
parency in traffic processes and impact 
links make it more difficult to lead a dis­
cussion oriented toward future abilities. 
On the other hand, the population in­
creasingly views the ever-smaller living 
space as a problem. This situation calls 
for public discussion (about values and 
quality of life). The public administration 
has the obligation to take the needs of 
all constituents seriously and to provide 
them with a forum for exchange.

Notes

This research was funded by the Swiss Na­
tional Science Foundation (SNF) within the 
framework of National Research Programme 
41 "Transport and Environment - Interactions 
Switzerland/Europe." Additional support 
came from the "Stiftung Lebens- und 
Wirtschaftsraum Zug," which prepared the 
ground for our regional case study.

References

COOPER, J., BROWNE, M. and PETERS, M„ 
1994. European Logistics. Markets, Man­
agement and Strategy. Second Edition, Ox­
ford: Blackwell.

COOPER, J., BLACK, I. and PETERS, M„ 
1996. Linking the environmental impact of 
freight transport to the restructuring of supply 
chains. Cranfield University.

DREHER, C. et al., 1995. Neue Produktions­
konzepte in der deutschen Industrie. Be­
standesaufnahme, Analyse und wirtschafts­
politische Implikationen. Heidelberg: Physica 
(Wirtschaft, Technik, Politik - Schriftenreihe 
des ISI-FHG 18).

DREHER , C. and KÖNIG, R„ 1996. Szena­
rien technisch-organisatorischer Innovationen 
und ihrer Auswirkungen auf den Güter­
verkehr. Strukturierung wesentlicher Ein­
flussfaktoren und Projektion alternativer 
Szenarien. Karlsruhe: Fraunhofer Institut für 
Systemtechnik und Innovationsforschung ISI.

European Conference of Ministers of Trans­
port ECMT (Eds.), 1997. New trends in lo­
gistics in Europe. Paris: OECD, 1997 (Report 
of the 104th Round Table on transport eco­
nomics).



DISP 148 78 2002

FRIGO-MOSCA, F„ BRÜTSCH, D„ HAFEN, 
U. and TETTAMANTI, S., 1996. Logistic Part­
nership: Supply Chain Management in der 
Schweizer Industrie. Zürich: vdf.

HARMSEN, D.M. 1998. Auswirkungen tech­
nisch-organisatorischer Innovationen auf den 
Güterverkehr - Ergebnisse einer empirischen 
Untersuchung bei der verladenden Industrie. 
Vortrag an der Traffic98, Internationale Kon­
ferenz in Berlin, 5.-6.2.1998.

HAUBOLD, V., 1995. Umstrukturierungs­
prozesse in der zwischenbetrieblichen Ar­
beitsteilung der Industrie: Eine theoretische 
und empirische Analyse unter besonderer 
Berücksichtigung logistischer Aspekte. Göt­
tingen: Vandenhoek und Rupprecht.

JÄCKER, A., 1997. Verkehrliche Wirkungen 
neuer Produktionskonzepte. Eine theoretische 
und empirische Analyse am Beispiel der 
deutschen Elektroindustrie. Göttingen: Van­
denhoek und Rupprecht.

KOBLER, R.A., 1997. Strategie European 
Distribution Logistics Design. Bamberg, Diss. 
1997 (Dissertation Nr. 2059 der Universität 
St. Gallen).

NIJKAMP , P., 1990. Spatial Developments 
in the United States of Europe: Glorious Vic­
tories or Great Defeats. Free University of 
Amsterdam: Department of Economics.

NIJKAMP, P„ BAGGEN, J. and VAN DER 
KNAAP, B., 1996. Spatial Sustainability and 
the Tyranny of Transport: A causal path sce­
nario analysis. Papers in regional science, 
75: 501-524.

Prof. Dr. Alain Thierstein 
Institut für Orts-, Regional­
und Landesplanung 
ETH Hönggerberg 
CH-8093 Zürich 
thierstein@orl.arch.ethz.ch

Klaus-Dieter Schnell 
IDT-HSG
Varnbüelstrasse 19 
CH-9000 St. Gallen 
Klaus-Dieter. Schnell@unisg.ch

THIERSTEIN, A„ SCHNELL, K.D. and 
SCHWEGLER, U„ 1999. Unternehmens­
strategien und Güterverkehr. Wirkungen und 
Zusammenhänge - gezeigt am Beispiel der 
Region Zug. Nationales Forschungspro­
gramm 41 Verkehr und Umwelt. Bericht B3. 
Bern: EDMZ.

VICKERMAN, R.W., (Ed.), 1991. Infrastruc­
ture and Regional Development. London: 
Pion (European Research in Regional Sci­
ence, Nr. 1).

WOMACK, James P., JONES, Daniel T. and 
ROOS, Daniel (1991): Die zweite Revolution 
in der Automobilindustrie: Konsequenzen aus 
der weltweiten Studie aus dem Massachu­
setts Institute of Technology. Frankfurt/M.: 
Campus.

mailto:thierstein%40orl.arch.ethz.ch
mailto:Schnell%40unisg.ch