DISP 149 3 2002
Martina Koll-Schretzenmayr

Law and Order

The principle of sustainability is cited as 
a state goal within the constitutional 
framework of the Swiss federation (art. 
2, section 2 of the Swiss Constitution) 
and is further dealt with in an entire sep­
arate constitutional article (art. 73) [1J. 
In its report "Sustainable Development 
Strategy 2002," the Swiss Federal Coun­
cil states that it does not view sustainable 
development as a separate policy sector, 
but rather as a "governing idea" encom­
passing all areas of policymaking.
On April 11, 2002, the Swiss Depart­
ment for Spatial Development declared 
unabashedly: "Every second, 0.86 
square meters of space are claimed as 
new space for settlement purposes. Cur­
rently, the total built-up area comprises 
2,859,369,128 square meters." Fictio 
cessat, ubi veritas locum habere potest - 
Fiction ceases, where truth can take its 
place. Is sustainability nothing more 
than fiction?
'A/hat relation exists between the ideals 
of law and reality? At first glance, the 
standing afforded the principle of sus­
tainable development in art. 2, sec. 2 
and art. 73 of the Swiss Constitution 
should be significant enough to bring 
about a verbal consensus between po­
licymakers, the business community, 
and society at large. However, putting 
sustainability into practice with concrete 
proposals and regulations is another 
matter, as is the case with many other 
've// known ideals and principles. Yet to 
forgo the idealism of the law would be a 
misinformed strategy and approach: "To 
'view the law as nothing more than a re­
flection of current circumstances would 
be to overlook its most important dimen­
sion, namely its role as both a catalyst 
ond a framework for the development of 
society." [2]
Legal systems seek to put in place a 
framework that guarantees individual 
rights and freedoms while serving to ad­
vance the common good. The norms of 
° state's legal system build a static order 
m which norms can only be established, 
changed, or abolished by lawmakers 
ff>emselves. A commonly accepted un­
derstanding of a state's legal framework 
relies on the assumption that it is a per­
manent feature of society. Yet this as­
sumption overlooks not only the fact that

political, social, economic, and spatial 
realities and goals change over time, 
but also that the law must be able to a- 
dapt to the dynamic of these changes 
and thereby prove itself capable of con­
tinuous development. Tempora mutantur 
lex et mutatur in illis. [3]
The effectiveness and continued rele­
vance of legal norms and instruments 
must therefore be put to the test on a per­
manent basis. As soon as a legal norm 
no longer influences the sectors and prob­
lems it was designed for in the manner 
desired, or if its underlying principles 
and goals have changed, it must be a- 
dapted to fit new realities and 
circumstances. In addition, it should be 
noted that legal norms do not exist inde­
pendently, but rather in a series of de­
pendent relationships. As such, the revi­
sion of one norm or the introduction of a 
new one may well necessitate changes in 
other legal norms, a possibility that po­
licymakers must always keep in mind. 
However, we will go even one step fur­
ther in our discussion of law and order: 
"Dynamic legal frameworks, as opposed 
to static ones, are made up of a series of 
principles, rather than laws and orders 
decreed by legislators." [4] De Robilant 
is convinced that dynamic legal frame­
works with malleable and competing 
principles at their core are better suited 
to the challenges of complex societies 
than static frameworks [5]. This belief 
begs the question of whether the princi­
ple of sustainability can be viewed as a 
component of dynamic legal frameworks 
as understood by de Robilant? And with­
in the substance of this question there 
exists a great deal of potential insight. 
The principle of sustainability views 
itself as bearing responsibility for the fu­
ture according to the principles of social 
justice between different generations 
and world regions. Yet responsibility for 
the future also necessitates an ethical 
stance where rights and duties are 
weighed equally among equal partners. 
As such, conflicts of interest should be 
resolved according to the legitimacy of 
claims, and not according to the rules of 
the reigning balance of power. [6] The 
principal of sustainability is to be seen 
as all encompassing for policymaking at 
each level of government: from strategy

formulation at the federal level to the im­
plementation of projects at the local 
level.
Sustainability can generally be com­
pared to freedom [7]: both are based 
on principle, both need to be anchored 
in the consciousness of politics and 
society, and the level of sustainability or 
freedom in a society is determined by 
the effectiveness of the regulations de­
signed to prevent their violation.
The first step has already been taken: sus­
tainability has been established as a 
goal of the state. The second step is cur­
rently underway: regulations protecting 
and guaranteeing the principle of sus­
tainability are being implemented. The 
third step will then have to follow: sus­
tainability has to be firmly established 
within societal consciousness. The future 
ceterum censeo for politics, planning, 
economy and society is therefore: 
Ceterum censeo vitam esse conservan­
do m. [8]

Translation: Martin Gahbauer, Washington D C.

Notes

[1] Art. 73 Nachhaltigkeit: Bund und Kantone 
streben ein auf Dauer ausgewogenes Verhält­
nis zwischen der Natur und ihrer Erneue­
rungsfähigkeit einerseits und ihrer Beanspru­
chung durch den Menschen anderseits an.
[2] Klenner, H. (2002): Realitäten und Idea­
litäten des Rechts. In: Jäggi, V.; Mäder, U.; 
Windisch, K. (2002): Entwicklung, Recht, 
Sozialer Wandel - Festschrift für Paul Trap­
pe. Social Strategies Vol. 35. Verlag Peter 
Lang AG, Bern, p. 233
[3] In Anlehnung an/following: Tempora 
mutantur nos et mutamur in illis - Die Zeiten 
ändern sich und wir ändern uns in ihnen.
[4] De Robilant, E. (2002): Gestaltung des 
Rechts in der komplexen Gesellschaft. In: Jäg­
gi, V; Mäder, U.; Windisch, K. (2002) 
a.a.O., p. 354 f.
[5] ebda., p. 356
[6] vgl. Bericht des Bundesrates «Strategie 
Nachhaltige Entwicklung 2002» vom 27. 
März 2002
[7] cf. Seidler, G.L. (2002): On the concept 
of liberty. In: Jäggi, V; Mäder, U.; Windisch, 
K. (2002) a.a.O., p. 304
[8] Lendi, M. (2002): Nachhaltigkeit in der 
Bürgergesellschaft. Verantwortungsvolles Pla­
nen und Entscheiden, Nachhaltigkeit in der 
Kommunalpolitik. In: Jäggi, V; Mäder, U.; 
Windisch, K. (2002), a.a.O., p. 132