1 Introduction

During his explorations of central Australia in 1845,
CHARLES STURT encountered a desert landscape the
like of which he had not previously been aware. It was
“… an immense plain, occupying more than half the
horizon”, and was “… of a dark purple hue and … ap-
peared to be perfectly level” (STURT 1849, 372).

Its surface consisted of “indurated or compact
quartz … coated with oxide of iron” (STURT 1849,
375). So flat is the stony plain that where interrupted by
sand dunes, the latter were described as abutting upon,
and terminating in, the plain “… like so many head-
lands projecting into the sea” (STURT 1849, 372). He
called this “gloomy stone-clad plain” the “Stony Des-
ert” (STURT 1849, 375) and it has since appropriately
become known as Sturts Stony Desert. It is part of the
Simpson Desert sensu lato, which comprises the Stony
Desert, the Strzelecki to the east, the Tirari to the west
(between the Stony and Lake Eyre), and the Simpson
Desert dunefield sensu stricto to the north, and essentially
in the Northern Territory.

In Australia, the stony carapace is known as gibber,
and the plains, gibber plains. Such surfaces are also
commonly referred to as stone pavements, but this is in
most instances inappropriate. A pavement is a smooth

surface and many hamadas, including most of Sturts
Stony Desert, are notoriously rough, with angular frag-
ments of rock 10 to 20 cm diameter standing in close
proximity on the surface (Photo 1 a). Only a few sectors
of the gibber plain, where the stone fragments are 
2–5 cm diameter and the spaces between are filled with
fines so that the resultant composite surface is com-
paratively smooth (Photo 1 b), warrant the term pave-
ment.

The gibber plains of arid Australia are an example of
a reg, an hamada or serir, depending on whether the con-
stituents of the stone mantle are predominantly coarse
or fine. In other parts of the world, the basaltic hamada
of the Tanezrouft of southern Algeria, the serir based in
argillaceous country rock in Namaqualand (Western
Cape Province) and Namibia, are comparable, but the
gibber of Sturts Stony Desert is particularly well known
because of the nature of the stony carapace, which is
predominantly of silcrete.
Silcrete-dominated gibber plains are found also to the
west of Lake Eyre, around Oodnadatta. Gibber plains
are common in other parts of the Australian desert,
where the composition of the stony carapace reflects
the character of the local bedrock – quartzite cobbles
and gravels are common, but limestone is found in
places, and around the iron-rich Hamersley Ranges 

Rowl C. Twidale and Jennifer A. Bourne: Sturts Stony Desert, central Australia 401

STURTS STONY DESERT, CENTRAL AUSTRALIA

With 7 figures and 9 photos

ROWL C. TWIDALE and JENNIFER A. BOURNE

“Ignorant of the existence of a similar geographical feature in any other part world, I was at a loss to divine its
nature” (STURT 1849, 373, on the stony desert that now bears his name).

Zusammenfassung: Sturts Stony Desert, Zentralaustralien
Die Sturts Stony Desert ist Teil der Simpson Desert im zentralen Australien. Der Name Stony Desert belegt, dass es sich

überwiegend um eine Hamada bzw. eine Gesteinsschuttwüste (gibber) handelt. Diese besteht aus eckigen Bruchstücken von Kie-
selsäurekrusten (silcrete). Der Schutt stammt aus der Zerschneidung und Zerstörung einer Kieselsäurekruste, die während des
Oligozäns und des Miozäns auf jung-mesozoischen Ablagerungen entstanden war. Durch die Denudation der Talhänge blieb
eine schwach reliefierte Landoberfläche zurück. Weitflächig handelt es sich dabei um eine Schnittfläche, die von (umgelager-
ten) silcrete-Bruchstücken bedeckt ist. Diese stellen einen Schutz gegen weitergehende Abtragungen dar. Nur dort, wo diese
Schuttdecke aufgelöst ist, tritt intensive gully-Erosion auf.

Summary: Sturts Stony Desert is part of the Simpson Desert of central Australia, and as its name suggests is dominated 
by hamada or gibber. The gibber consists of angular fragments of silcrete derived from the dissection and disintegration of a
siliceous duricrust developed on later Mesozoic strata during the Oligocene and Miocene. The faceted slopes bordering 
the valleys of incised streams have been worn back leaving behind a surface of low relief, part of etch type, and carrying lag
deposit of silcrete stones which forms a protective veneer. Nevertheless, where the gibber crust has been breached gullying is
common.



402 Erdkunde Band 56/2002

MMM
uuu
lllllliiiggg

aaa
nnn

RRR

...

EEEyyy
rrreee

CCCkkk...

EEE
yyyrrreee

CCC
rrreee

eee
kkk

D
ia

m

an
tin

a
Th

e
W

ar
bu

rto
n

C
oo

pe
r
C

k.

The Fro
me

Marree

Moomba InnaminckaInnaminckaInnamincka

MungerannieMungerannieMungerannie

CordilloCordilloCordillo

BetootaBetootaBetoota

BirdsvilleBirdsvilleBirdsville

Bedourie

140°140°140°139°139°139°137° E137° E137° E

25° S25° S25° S

28°28°28°

138°138°138°

SIMPSONSIMPSONSIMPSON

DESERTDESERTDESERT

WILLOURAN RA.WILLOURAN RA.WILLOURAN RA. FLINDERS RA.FLINDERS RA.FLINDERS RA.

STRZELECKISTRZELECKISTRZELECKI

DESERTDESERTDESERT

S
T
U

R
T
S
 S

TO
N

Y
 D

E
S
E
R

T

S
T
U

R
T
S
 S

TO
N

Y
 D

E
S
E
R

T

S
T
U

R
T
S
 S

TO
N

Y
 D

E
S
E
R

T

H
ay R

iver

H
ay R

iver

H
ay R

iver

GoydersGoydersGoyders
LagoonLagoonLagoon

COOPERCOOPERCOOPER
FLOODFLOODFLOOD

OUTOUTOUT

LakeLakeLake
EyreEyreEyre
NorthNorthNorth

LakeLakeLake
Eyre SouthEyre SouthEyre South

L. CallabonnaL. CallabonnaL. Callabonna

L. BlancheL. BlancheL. Blanche

L. HopeL. HopeL. Hope

LakeLakeLake
YammaYammaYamma
YammaYammaYamma

C
O

O
P

E
R

C
O

O
P

E
R

C
O

O
P

E
R

F
L
O

O
D

 P
L
A

IN

F
L
O

O
D

 P
L
A

IN

F
L
O

O
D

 P
L
A

IN

Ka
llak

oo
p
a
h

C
k.

SSS
tttrrr
zzzeee

llleee
ccckkk

iii CCC
kkk...

silcrete

playa lake

drainage

anticline

Precambrian upland

0 100 km

N
O

R
T

H
E

R
N

 T
E

R
R

IT
O

R
Y

Q
U

E
E

N
S

L
A

N
D

SOUTH           AUSTRALIA

MT.MT.MT.
GASONGASONGASON

N.T.

W.A.

S.A.
N.S.W.

Vic.

Qld.

0 1000 km

Fig. 1: Location map

Lage des Arbeitsgebietes



of the northwest of Western Australia, ferruginous
pebbles or fragments coated with iron oxides form a
gravel carpet.

Sturts Stony Desert, as usually perceived, is that re-
gion about 60,000 km2 in extent partly traversed by the
explorer, in what is now northeastern South Australia,
between Mungerannie and Birdsville in the west and
extending roughly to the Queensland border (Fig. 1).
Similar plains occur in southwestern Queensland be-
tween Birdsville and Bedourie, and as far east as the
Paroo River (WHITEHOUSE 1941); though in these
areas, as in parts of the South Australian sector, the gib-
ber is partly masked by alluvium or by fields of sand du-
nes. Here we consider Sturts Stony Desert in this broa-
der sense.

2 Description of the Stony Desert

For the most part, and as STURT and other travellers
have attested, the Stony Desert is an extraordinarily
featureless plain (Photo 2 a). In places however, its
regularity is broken on the one hand by low mesas or
plateaux standing up to 20–25 m above the adjacent
plains (Photo 2 b), and on the other by shallow widely-
spaced river valleys (Photo 2 c). Although located some
700–750 km from the sea, the plain is flat as well as low-
lying. Around Birdsville, the plain stands some 50–60 m
above sea level and is of a similar elevation in the south,
around Mungerannie. Its level declines to below 50 m
to the west where the downfaulted Lake Eyre stands
some 15–16 m below sea level (WOPFNER a. TWIDALE

1967; DULHUNTY 1987). In places, as to the southeast
of Cordillo Downs, high red dunes extend on to the
gibber surface and marginal to major river flood plains
like those of the Diamantina and Cooper, the Stony
Desert is dissected and rolling, or broadly undulating.
But elsewhere the plain is flat, featureless and at most
times devoid of vegetation.

The Stony Desert is located almost entirely within
the hyperarid zone around Lake Eyre. Mungerannie,
for example, averages only 120 mm per annum, while
Innamincka (154.5 mm) and Cordillo Downs (163 mm)
are only slightly higher. As STURT’s journals attest, and
modern records confirm, summer temperatures are
scorching with shade maxima averaging just under
40ºC and commonly reaching 45ºC or more, in the
shade and much higher – STURT recorded a tempera-
ture of 157ºF (55ºC) – in the sun. Potential evaporation
is high (over 3,600 mm: see KOTWICKI 1986; ALLAN
1990). Yet averages are misleading for incursions of
westerly lows in winter and tropical systems in summer
bring heavy local rains after which the desert blooms.
Also monsoon rains cause rivers like the Thomson-
Cooper, the Diamantina-Warburton and the Georgina
to flood and from time to time, and more frequently
than was at one time suspected, transform Lake Eyre
into a lake (BONYTHON a. MASON 1953; KOTWICKI
1986). The entire area is held under pastoral lease, for
cattle can not only survive, but flourish, on the occa-
sional pastures, and the water-holes, or ‘billabongs’, of
such major rivers as the Warburton and the Cooper, fed
by headwaters in monsoonal Australia, provide water-
ing points which, if not permanent, are long-lasting.

Rowl C. Twidale and Jennifer A. Bourne: Sturts Stony Desert, central Australia 403

Photo 1: Types of gibber (a) coarse hamada (b) fine, close-packed pavement

Typen des gibber (a) grobkörnige Hamada und (b) feinkörniges, dicht-gelagertes Pflaster



On the surface are exposed “… sandstone, quartz,
and (magnetic) ironstone pebbles, so densely and firmly
set together in some places as to have the appearance of
an old-fashioned pavement” (WILLS 1863, 160: the
“old-fashioned pavement” is presumably the modern
crazy paving). The gibbers are, overwhelmingly, of
silcrete: a few exotic pebbles and cobbles of quartz or
quartzite are found, especially in the valleys of major
waterways, and in some areas, small rounded, fre-
quently ovoid, pebbles of white quartz, released by the
disintegration of the host rock, are mixed with the
blocks, but most of the gibber consists of large angular
fragments of silcrete.

Between the stones a hard crust is developed on the
fines. It is due to alternations of wetting and drying, the
occasional wetting or moistening resulting not so much
from rains but from condensation and dew – for winter
nights can be cold. Water is adsorbed on to soil particles
and on desiccation and heating, cements them together
to produce an encrustation (see RUSSELL 1957, 37;
SHARON 1962). It is significant for it not only retards

winnowing but also reduces the volume of fines in
motion, thus reducing the chances of infilling the voids
between stones, at least on higher ground that is out of
reach of fines transported by wash.

3 Geology

Considered globally, the geological setting of Sturts
Stony Desert is unusual, for though most hamadas are
“especially prevalent in alluvial fans, bajadas, and ter-
races composed of sediments derived from meta-
morphic and volcanic rocks” (ELVIDGE a. IVERSON
1983, 225) it is underlain by gently folded Jurassic and
Cretaceous strata which are in some areas succeeded by
various flat-lying younger or gently dipping Tertiary
strata and by Quaternary sediments (e. g. WILLIAMS
1973; WILLIAMS a. MOND 1973; FORBES 1974; TOWN-
SEND a. THORNTON 1975; PIRSA 2001). Though they
are minor in comparison with the extensive gibber
plains all around, the hill country associated with the

404 Erdkunde Band 56/2002

Photo 2: (a) Typical gibber plain with silcrete blocks as a lag
deposit, Birdsville Track between Mungerannie and Goy-
ders Lagoon. (b) Plateaux capped by silcrete in situ, north-
east of Innamincka. (c) Rolling plain protected by veneer
of silcrete blocks, Kamaran Downs, west of Bedourie,
southwest Queensland. Note the clayey valley floor derived
from clays washed from the original weathered mantle

(a) Typische gibber-Ebene mit silcrete-Blöcken als Residual-
sediment, Birdsville Track zwischen Mungerannie und
Goyders Lagune. (b) Mit silcrete in situ bedeckte Ebene
nordöstlich von Innamincka. (c) Wellige Ebene, geschützt
durch eine dünne Decke verkieselter Blöcke, Kamaran
Downs, westlich von Bedourie, Südwest-Queensland. Zu
beachten ist der tonige Talboden, der von umgelagerten
Tonen der ursprünglichen Verwitterungsdecke gebildet
wird

(a) (b)

(c)



Cooryanna and Gason domes dominate the western
part of the stony desert (Fig. 2) and the Innamincka
Dome the east. Though they include arenaceous and
carbonate strata, argillites dominate these sedimentary
sequences which were weathered and reduced to a
surface of low relief during the Oligocene and Mio-
cene. The main, crystalline silcrete was formed on this
‘Cordillo’ surface (WOPFNER 1974). A younger silcrete,
distinguished from the more extensive Oligocene-Mio-
cene duricrust by its opaline matrix, is found in the
southern parts of Sturts Stony Desert, in the lower
parts of the Lake Eyre basin. It is of putative Pleisto-
cene age (WOPFNER a. TWIDALE 1967).

Weathering involved solution, hydration and hydro-
lysis and altered the country rock at, and for a few
metres below, the surface. The resultant regolith con-
sisted of a dense siliceous B horizon, possibly with a
thin A-horizon (which may have been clayey, but of
which little, if any, has survived erosion by water and
wind), and underlain by several metres of kaolinised
material. At many sites, no sign of original sedimentary
structures such as bedding remains in the upper several
metres of this zone, which consist of kaolinised materi-
als. Elsewhere, however, weathered strata with bedding
are exposed both in the flanks of mesas (Photo 3 a) and
in shallow excavations sunk below the plain (Photo 4).
This period of weathering preceded the folding that
has produced the hill country associated with the
various dome structures (WOPFNER 1960; SPRIGG 1963;
also COATS et al. 1969; see Fig. 3). It produced the
siliceous capping that protects the mesas and cuestas,
and from which, on breaking down, the gibber origi-
nates.

4 Origin of the plain

The origin of the landscape can be considered under
two headings: first, the evolution of the plain following
dissection of the weathered (silcreted) land surface
during the earlier Tertiary; and second, the derivation
of the gibber.

The region was reduced to low relief during the
Early Tertiary as a result of long-continued weathering
and river erosion of weak strata. On this plain the
siliceous horizon hardened as a result of desiccation
consequent on dissection and lowering of the water
table. Such resistant carapaces are known as duricrusts
and those of siliceous composition, silcretes. Its occur-
rence has determined the landscape development in
this region. Where remnants of the original silcrete
persist, whether developed on Cretaceous argillite or as
an orthoquartzitic induration – the “surface quartzite”
of FRANKEL a. KENT (1937) – on early Tertiary sand-
stone, the hard capping has given rise to plateau forms
(Photo 3 b). In southwest Queensland and adjacent
parts of South Australia, the silcreted surfaces have
been folded and dissected, forming cuestas (Fig. 3) but
in many areas dips are so slight that plateau forms are
dominant (Photo 2 b). Sandstone and other inter-
bedded resistant strata in places give rise to structural
benches (Fig. 4 a).

Most of the silcrete-capped surface and the under-
lying kaolinitic regolith have, however, been dissected
and stripped by rivers. The hard caprock induced scarp
retreat. Left behind was the present gibber-strewn
plain. In some areas, and especially adjacent to major
waterways such as the Cooper, the stony carapace is

Rowl C. Twidale and Jennifer A. Bourne: Sturts Stony Desert, central Australia 405

Fig. 2: Diagrammatic section through Gason Dome (after WILLIAMS 1973; see also TOWNSEND a. THORNTON 1975).
K – Cretaceous; T – Tertiary; Tsi – silcrete; Q – Quaternary

Profilschnitt durch den Gason Dome. K – Kreide; T – Tertiär; Tsi – silcrete (Kieselsäurekruste); Q – Quartär

Q

Tsi

T
K

T
Q

Tsi
Tsi

K

K

T K

Tsi

Tsi



underlain by vesicular or bubbly clays derived from the
erosion and translocation of the kaolinised bedrock,
and here its level may have been determined by local
and regional baselevels (the then current stand of the
bed of Lake Eyre) and local baselevels (other salinas
and major rivers). However, on the divides between
major rivers and particularly adjacent to the Birdsville
Track north of Mungerannie and south of Goyders
Lagoon shallow quarries (‘borrow’ pits – so called
presumably because material is taken from one site to
shore up another) excavated in the gibber plain to
obtain material for road foundations, have exposed
slightly altered but still cohesive and obviously stratified
Mesozoic rocks beneath the thin soil layer (Photo 4).
This suggests that much of the gibber plain originated
as an etch surface (Fig. 4 b; FALCONER 1911; JUTSON
1914), formed as a result of stripping of the intensely
kaolinised rock down to the level where the argillite
retained a measure of cohesion. In these terms the
regularity of the plain is due to the ease with which the
underlying argillites were altered (cf. the Nullarbor
Plain: TWIDALE 1990), the uniform thickness of the
resultant regolith, and the consequent evenness of the
weathering front (MABBUTT 1961), the lower limit of
significant weathering, with ‘significant’ the crucial
word, implying susceptibility to erosion under the
prevailing conditions.

Thus the gibber plains of northeastern South Aus-
tralia and adjacent areas of Queensland are in part,

and in a broad sense, congeners of the etch plains that
are so prominent, and indeed dominant throughout
central Australia, having been exposed by the stripping
of both laterite and silcrete profiles (MABBUTT 1965). In
some areas, etch surfaces have been produced by the
stripping of only part of a differentiated regolith (e. g.
WRIGHT 1963; TWIDALE 1990, 2002). This has oc-
curred in parts of the Stony Desert, where the lag or
veneer of silcrete fragments that give the Stony Desert
its characteristics was deposited on a bedrock surface
cut in strata which is slightly altered, but retains struc-
ture and cohesion.

5 Origin of the gibber

5.1 Silcrete – character and origin

The Stony Desert is underlain by Cretaceous strata
most of which are argillaceous, but the pavement is
composed overwhelmingly of fragments of silcrete of
Oligicene-Miocene age. It is characteristically dark
purple or brown on the outside but displays various
colours – grey, yellow, orange, brown, red or even white,
but typically grey or yellowish brown – on unweathered
faces. Silcrete is a dense siliceous rock (96–97% silica)
with minor amounts of alumina, iron, titanium, and
traces of yttrium, zirconium and niobium (HUTTON
et al. 1978); though some silcrete skins, which are up to

406 Erdkunde Band 56/2002

Photo 3: (a) Mesa with silcrete capping and exposed kaolinised zone northeast of Innamincka. Note the ‘false’ cuesta to the left
of the mesa and due to streams exploiting the intensely weathered scarp foot zone. (b) Mesa capped by silicified sandstone
(orthoquartzite) of the Eocene-Palaeocene Eyre Formation, a few kilometres east of Innamincka

(a) Tafelland mit einer silcrete-Überdeckung und einer freigelegten kaolinisierten Zone nordöstlich von Innamincka. Zu
beachten ist die ‚falsche’ Schichtstufe zur Linken des Tafellandes, die auf Bäche zurückzuführen ist, die den intensiv
verwitterten Hangfuß ausräumen. (b) Mit einem silifizierten Sandstein (Orthoquarzit) bedeckte Schichttafel der Eozän-
Paläozän Eyre-Formation, einige Kilometer östlich von Innamincka



10 cm thick in places (HUTTON et al. 1972), and formed
in scarp-foot zones, contain up to 25% titanium oxide
(anatase), which shows as pale yellow smears on the
rock. Such skins may be due to the concentration of
minor elements in the country rock by leaching of
more soluble elements (see e. g. WOPFNER a. TWIDALE
1967; WOPFNER 1978; HUTTON et al. 1972, 1978). The
rock is typically porphyroclastic, with shards of quartz
set in a matrix of finely divided crystalline quartz
(Photo 5). The shards are probably due to the splitting
and displacement of quartz fragments during crystal-
lisation of the groundmass (WOPFNER 1978).

Silcrete characteristically displays a columnar struc-
ture, with grooves prominently developed on the sides
of the columns. Whorled shapes – some of them remi-
niscent of African stone carvings – are common, as are
surficial solution hollows and pits. The dense siliceous
rock has a well-developed conchoidal fracture, making
it ideal for the manufacture of primitive tools such as
scrapers, spear points and axes, and it was so utilised by
the indigenous inhabitants of the region. Overwhelm-
ingly, silcretes originated in quite extensive horizontal
sheets, but how extensive were the sheets of silcrete,
and how was the siliceous duricrust formed? The sheet
silcretes have been attributed to the weathering of the
country rock, but this cannot account for the presence
in many silcretes of exotic rounded cobbles and gravels,
and for compositional incongruities as between silcrete
and country rock. The most extreme example of such

compositional incompatibility is the occurrence of
silcrete on limestone, as can be seen at several sites in
the southern Flinders Ranges. Clearly, in some occur-
rences, silica and other materials and elements have
been introduced to the sites where they are presently
found, either in surface streams or in groundwaters
(YOUNG 1985). Both methods of transport are feasible
but that streams and rivers are involved is suggested
first by the presence of rounded exotic gravels in the
silcretes, second by their preservation in linear or wind-
ing and relatively narrow outcrops (Fig. 3 a; TWIDALE
1983, 1985; see also PARTRIDGE a. MAUD 1987), and
third by the basinal form in cross-section (normal to the
length of outcrop) of some plateau exposures (Photo 6).

The latter morphology can, however, also be con-
strued as reflecting the relative stability of the better-

Rowl C. Twidale and Jennifer A. Bourne: Sturts Stony Desert, central Australia 407

Photo 4: Borrow pit with weathered but cohesive strata ex-
posed at shallow depth coincident with plain surface,
Birdsville Track between Mungerannie and Goyders
Lagoon

Entnahmegrube mit in geringer Tiefe aufgeschlossenen
verwitterten, aber kohäsiven Schichten, die mit der Ober-
fläche der Ebene übereinstimmen, Birdsville Track zwi-
schen Mungerannie und Goyders Lagune

Photo 5: Porphyroclastic texture in skin silcrete on quartzite

Porphyroklastisches Gefüge der silcrete-Haut eines Quar-
zits.

Photo 6: Basinal form of silcrete capping on mesa on western
side of Simpson Desert

Beckenform der silcrete-Überdeckung auf dem Tafelland
an der westlichen Seite der Simpson Desert



408 Erdkunde Band 56/2002

InnaminckaInnaminckaInnamincka

BetootaBetootaBetoota

BirdsvilleBirdsvilleBirdsville

Bedourie

H
a
y R

ive
r

H
a
y R

ive
r

H
a
y R

ive
r

silcrete lakes, salinas

water courses

N
O

R
T

H
E

R
N

 T
E

R
R

IT
O

R
Y

QUEENSLAND

SOUTH                           AUSTRALIA

CCCooo
oooppp

eeerrr
CCC

rrreee
eee
kkk

TTThhheee

WWW

aaarrr
bbbuuu

rrrttt
ooo
nnn

Th
e

D
ia

m
an

tin

a

T
he

D
ia

m
a

n
ti
n
a

F
ie

ld

R
ive

r

R
ive

r

Georgina R
iv

er

Ha
m

ilt

on

0 100 km

Fig. 3: (a) Map showing folded silcrete in northeastern South Australia and adjacent areas

Karte der gefalteten silcretes im Nordosten Südaustraliens und angrenzender Gebiete



drained exposed margins of dissected silcrete remnants
while the interior masses remain subject to moisture
attack, solutional evacuation, and volume decrease; a
mechanism which is self-perpetuating, for once a
depression forms behind the peripheral rim, water
gravitates to it (TWIDALE a. MILNES 1983 a and b). Such
an alluvial origin of some silcretes implies that some of
the silcrete-capped plateaux that are now prominent
relief features were valley floors during the Oligocene-
Miocene and that thus there has been relief inversion
(Fig. 5).

Sheet silcrete is due to the concentration of silica in,
and possibly essentially at the surface of the regolith.
The common occurrence beneath the siliceous horizon
of weathered country rock can be misleading for the
juxtaposition suggests that the two are genetically link-
ed. So they are, but not in the sense that the siliceous
horizon is a weathering product derived from the same
parent material as the kaolinised zone, for the silcrete
contains rare elements absent both from the kaolinised
material and the bedrock (q.v.). The genetic connection
is that the silica was introduced in surface flows 
or shallow groundwaters and those waters caused 
the alteration of country rock to kaolinite. The details
of the silicification must needs remain speculative 
for no modern analogue has yet been recognised (but
see WOPFNER 1978, 137; VAN DIJK a. BECKMANN
1978).

Suffice it to say that many occurrences of sheet
silcrete are found in enclosed basins. Thus, and taking
a regional perspective, STEPHENS (1964) suggested that
the centripetal drainage of central Australia (due in
turn to the recurrent subsidence of the Lake Eyre
region: see WOPFNER a. TWIDALE 1967) provided the
essential clue, with silica leached from the headwater
reaches of such rivers as the Thomson, Barcoo, Dia-
mantina and Georgina, being carried to the lower
regions of the interior catchment and there, with no
outlet to the ocean, was precipitated in channels and

shallow groundwater zones. The concentration of silica
implied by silcrete formation has been attributed to its
concentration of plants, notably ferns, and then, on 
the death and decay of the plants, by its preservation 
in phytoliths, followed by their concentration in soil 
(e. g. LOVERING 1959). Local surficial accumulations of
silica-rich rocks may have originated as lacustrine gels.
ÖPIK (1954; ÖPIK et al. 1973) suggested such an origin
for freshwater quartzites (Lee’s Waterhole Sandstone,
later subsumed in the Polland Waterhole Shale and
assigned to the Tambo Formation – CARTER a. ÖPIK
1959) of the Thorntonia region of northwestern
Queensland, and silcrete is associated with palaeolake
margins elsewhere also, as for example the lake that
occupied the northern Willochra Basin of the southern
Flinders Ranges in ?Middle Eocene times (TWIDALE
a. BOURNE 1996).

Given the prevalent low relief and gradients, the
evidence of minor but widespread tectonism in the
later Cainozoic (e. g. YOUNGS a. WOPFNER 1972), the
apparent low rate of headward regression of streams
(TAYLOR et al. 1985; YOUNG a. MCDOUGALL 1993), the
occurrence of numerous local and regional but ephem-
eral basins of interior drainage conducive to surficial
silicification can be anticipated. Silica is a common
constituent of the dissolved load of rivers (see e. g.
LIVINGSTONE 1963; DAVIS 1964; DOUGLAS 1978).
Whether such dissolution was encouraged by high
temperatures is problematic for the evidence is contra-
dictory. Palaeontological evidence suggests that humid
warm (‘rain forest’) conditions obtained during the
Early and Middle Tertiary when the main central Aus-
tralian silcretes formed (e. g. STIRTON et al. 1961;
BROWN et al. 1968, 307–308; LUDBROOK 1969; WOPF-
NER 1978) but the palaeoclimatic evidence favours
cooler conditions during that period (FRAKES 1979;
FRAKES et al. 1992). What is certain is that whatever
temperature regime favoured silcrete formation, the
resultant duricrust is preserved in aridity.

Rowl C. Twidale and Jennifer A. Bourne: Sturts Stony Desert, central Australia 409

BETOOTA  ANTICLINE

HADDON SYNCLINE

CURALLE ANTICLINE

silcretesilcreteferricrete

Betoota Limestone

drift sand
300

0
metres

0 10 km

Fig. 3: (b) Diagrammatic section through breached Betoota and Curalle anticlines (after WOPFNER 1960; SPRIGG 1963)

Profilschnitt der unterbrochenen Antiklinalen Netoota und Curalle



5.2 Derivation of the gibber

Silcrete forms a protective caprock which when dis-
sected gives rise to plateau forms where the surface
remains undeformed, or cuestas where gently tilted.
Plateaux are everywhere visible within the Stony
Desert. The areal extent of such residuals is reduced
only by the undermining and collapse of the caprock.
This is made possible by the occurrence beneath the
silcrete of altered argillaceous country rock. The result-
ant white kaolinite-rich regolith so prominently ex-
posed in the flanks of many silcrete-capped plateaux
(Photo 3 a) is readily eroded by rivulets and streams.
The slope is, however, also protected by the blocky
debris fallen from the bluff and dissection is in many

places localised to produce ‘false cuestas’ and ‘false
flatirons’ (Photo 3 a: ‘false’ because, though morpho-
logically simulating the features named, they are not 
an expression of gently dipping strata; see TWIDALE
1978).

The gibber of Sturts Stony Desert is derived from
the disintegration of silcrete which is a duricrust and
hence a surficial accumulation, but which has been
dissected as a result of river rejuvenation consequent
on the long-term subsidence of the bed of Lake Eyre,
the focus of rivers draining the Stony Desert, and
indeed much of central and northeastern Australia
(WOPFNER a. TWIDALE 1967). Whether the primary
silcrete that is the source of the gibber formed in
extensive, essentially continuous sheets, or in compara-

410 Erdkunde Band 56/2002

Fig. 4: Diagrammatic sections showing (a) silcrete-capped mesa with structural bench, (b) suggested development of gibber
plain as an etch surface

Profilschnitt des (a) mit silcretes überdeckten Tafellandes mit strukturgestützter Stufe, (b) Modellvorstellung zur Entwicklung
der gibber-Ebene als eine Rumpffläche

a)

b)

silcrete

sandstone

weathering
front

k
a

o
lin

it
e

Mesozoic sedimentsMesozoic sedimentsMesozoic sediments

k
a

o
lin

it
e

silcrete

weathering
front

k
a

o
lin

it
e

Mesozoic sedimentsMesozoic sedimentsMesozoic sediments



tively narrow valley floors is of some significance when
the distribution and character of the gibber is con-
sidered.

Once the rivers of the region incised their beds, their
valley-side slopes and those of their tributaries were
scoured by gullies. These were fed by seepages pro-
duced by meteoric waters percolating through the per-
vious silcrete cap and running along the upper surface
of the impermeable clay. Sapping at the base of the
silcrete bluffs resulted in undermining and collapse of
debris on to the slope below. As the gullies cut into the
kaolinite their headslopes were steepened and became
unstable and slumped mass movements of debris de-
velop producing scalloped depressions, again causing
downslope movement of the stony carapace. Thus the
steep, faceted slopes bordering the plateaux were
undermined and eventually collapsed, and the margins
of the plateau residuals were worn back (Fig. 4 b:
TWIDALE a. MILNES 1983 a).
The massive silcrete capping broke down into frag-
ments, especially where the columnar structure is pro-
nounced. The blocks disintegrated into smaller blocks
by hitting against each other during collapse and slid-
ing. Water also penetrated along fissures and cracks,
weathered the silcrete with which it came into contact
by dissolving silica, thus causing the blocks to break
apart along the weakened fracture lines. The debris
slopes below the bluffs came to be strewn with blocks,
or gibbers, derived from the capping. As well as coating
most stone fragments and imposing a reddish brown
hue to clays derived from the weathered mantle, haema-
tite and goethite became concentrated in some scarp-
foot zones.
As scarp retreat continued, and more fines were eroded
from the weathered substrate, hillslope inclinations
distant from the scarps were reduced. Given the Oli-
gocene-Miocene age of the dominant silcrete of the
Stony Desert, the gibber plains derived from it must be
of later Cainozoic age, but the gibber plains are
diachronic. The plains increase in age with distance
from the youthful and penecontemporary scarp-foot
zones adjacent to the mesa remnants.

The silcrete detritus became concentrated to form a
veneer only one stone thick, and set on and amongst a
layer of weathered vesicular or ‘bubbly’ brown loams
(WRIGHT et al. 1990; Photo 7). At the same time, the
plains were lowered. Remnants of former plains, pro-
tected and preserved by a gibber layer, persist in mesas
standing a few metres higher than the present valley
floors (Fig. 6).

Near major rivers such as the Diamantina, tributa-
ries have incised a few metres below the general plain
level, and the gibber surface is preserved in low convex

Rowl C. Twidale and Jennifer A. Bourne: Sturts Stony Desert, central Australia 411

SS

a)

b)

S S

Fig. 5: Inversion of valley silcrete: (a) valley floor develop-
ment, (b) inversion following preferential degradation of
divide. S – silcrete

Reliefumkehr von Tal-silcretes: (a) Talboden Entwicklung,
(b) einer vorgegebenen Degradierung einer Wasserscheide.
S – Kieselkonglomerate

Photo 7: Gibber one stone thick exposed in road cutting north
of Innamincka

gibber-Aufschluss an einem Straßeneinschnitt nördlich von
Innamincka

Photo 8: Silcrete rise with concentric crenulated patterns
between Birdsville and Bedourie

silcrete-Erhebung mit konzentrisch gewellter Anordnung
zwischen Birdsville und Bedourie



upward rises. The lag deposit is preserved as the sub-
strate is preferentially winnowed and the coarse cover is
lowered. The stony rises display roughly concentric but
crenulated patterns (Photo 8) due to the wash of fines
from the crests downslope (TWIDALE 1972).

The red-brown clays beneath the gibber cover are
derived from the erosion and transport by wash and
streams of the kaolinitic zone of the weathered mantle
capped by silcrete. Though predominantly kaolinitic
these bubbly clays include smectite and are thus ex-
pansive (NORRISH a. PICKERING 1983; WRIGHT et al.
1990). Only in river flood plains has it been buried, and
here the surface stony horizon is formed and main-
tained by the churning due to alternations of wetting
and drying of thick cracking clays rich in alkalis such 
as sodium chloride, calcium carbonate and gypsum
(WRIGHT et al. 1990). Thus coarse debris is moved to
and remains at the surface, being too large to fall down
cracks. Sturt recorded that at slightly lower levels than
the Stony Desert he entered on an “earthy plain … re-
sembling in appearance a boundless piece of ploughed
land … the earth seemed to have once been mud and
then dried” (STURT 1849, 376), and this is consistent
with the widespread occurrence beneath the siliceous
horizon of an expansive or cracking clay derived from
the weathering of the Cretaceous argillites that under-
lie the region. The gilgai mechanism (ENGLAND, in
PRESCOTT 1931; HOWARD 1939; LEEPER 1947, 53–54;
HALLSWORTH et al. 1955; SPRINGER 1958; OLLIER

1966; MABBUTT 1977, 123ff.) can produce a micro-
topography consisting of puffs bordered by depressions 
and separating them from the intervening shelves 
(Fig. 7). On most gibber plains such microtopography is
subdued by the density of the stony crust and is most
commonly indicated by the presence of small depres-
sions or crabholes. Though the silcrete gibber of the
Stony Desert originated as a surface layer (cf. MCFAD-
DEN et al. 1987), the gilgai mechanism ensures that any
gibber that falls into a ‘crabhole’ (a regional name for 
a depression formed in the cracking clays), or which is
buried by alluvium during a flood, for example, is
returned to the surface after relatively few alternations
of wetting and drying (see JESSUP 1970; COOKE et al.
1993, 74).

Thus the gibber is overwhelmingly a coarse lag
gravel deposit (e. g. HUBBLE et al. 1983, 28) which has
never been extensively or deeply buried but which has
been concentrated by wash and wind to form an essen-
tially complete cover to the plains derived from the dis-
section of the older silcreted surface of which remnants
survive in the hill country. The upward migration of
stones is of limited importance in Sturts Stony Desert,
though soil churning has maintained the gibber cover
where the gravel has fallen into crabholes. In this the
gibber of the Stony Desert differs from many other
hamadas which are underlain by detritrus of mixed
calibre (e. g. SHARON 1962), because wash and wind,
rather than soil churning have maintained the stony

412 Erdkunde Band 56/2002

MMM

MMM

Fig. 6: Sketch of dissected silcrete-capped plateau northeast of Innamincka, showing mesas (M) – old valley floor remnants –
capped by silcrete gibber

Skizze einer zerschnittenen, mit silcrete überdeckten Schichttafel (M) nordöstlich von Innamincka, alte Talbödenrelikte, die
mit verkieselten gibber bedeckt sind



carapace derived from the dissection, undermining,
collapse and disintegration of the primary mid Tertiary
silcrete horizon.

5.3 Character of gibber

DURY (1970) has claimed that the size of gibber
varies in an orderly manner according to distance from
source, and in general this appears to be so. There are
many exceptions however, with patches of large blocks
surrounded by comparatively fine debris. DURY attrib-
utes such anomalies to the gilgai effect, but this can only
be a minor factor in the Stony Desert for the lag origi-
nates as a surficial development and has been lowered
to its present position as a result of the winnowing and
evacuation of fines produced by the weathering of the
country rock. Any anomalies must be related either to
the character of the primary silcrete or to the mecha-
nism of breakdown and distribution. For example the
fracture density of silcrete varies (perhaps according to
thickness and rate of desiccation) and this could be
reflected in the size of detritus. Again, gullying of debris
slopes causes coarse debris to gravitate into the gullies
and to set in train the gully gravure mechanism, so 
that linear streams of coarser materials are produced
(BRYAN 1940; TWIDALE a. MILNES 1983 a; TWIDALE
a. CAMPBELL 1986). These could be maintained even
after the reduction in slope gradient by the selective
evacuation of fines. Certainly old stream channels,
identified by their coarser bedload blocks and cobbles,
persist on slopes in the Ooraminna Ranges, southeast
of Alice Springs (TWIDALE a. MILNES 1983 b), and on
covered pediments in the western piedmont of the Flin-
ders Ranges (BOURNE a. TWIDALE 1998).

The calibre of the silcrete gibber varies spatially, but
how are the columns and blocks first reduced to angu-

lar fragments and then further reduced in size? Three
possibilities suggest themselves. First, although high sur-
face temperatures are undoubtedly experienced in the
Stony Desert (surface temperatures are much higher
than air temperatures) the experimental evidence (e. g.
BLACKWELDER 1933; GRIGGS 1936) argues against
insolation alone being effective in breaking down rocks.
Nevertheless, in time weak stresses may prove effective:
long exposure, with many cycles of heating and cooling
may have an impact. The effectiveness of this mecha-
nism varies with lithology but is favoured in principle 
by many workers (e. g. SHARON 1962; OLLIER 1963).
Furthermore, if during recent humid periods the Stony
Desert carried some vegetation, the ephemeral but
intense heat generated during bushfires induced by
lightning strikes, could have caused the splitting even of
dense rocks like silcrete.

Second, silcrete fragments commonly display evi-
dence of desilication in the form of bleached and/or
iron-stained zones in which the matrix has been re-
duced and a granular texture introduced. This pre-
sumably occurs as a result of water coming into contact
with the outer surface or penetrating along cracks 
and fissures. The alkalinity of desert soils and shallow
groundwaters is conducive to such reactions (e. g. JOLY
1901; ACQUAYE a. TINSLEY 1965; BENNETT 1991).
Third, clays washed or falling into cracks and in contact
with water may swell and exert sufficient pressure to
rupture the rock. Or, of course, two or all of these
mechanisms may produce splitting and reduction of
debris.

6 Extensive sheets or valley floor accumulations?

Though substantial remnants of silcrete-capped hills
(mainly plateaus and mesas, but some cuestas) break
the monotony of the gibber plains, the latter are exten-
sive. Yet with the exception of the flood plains of major
rivers, the silcrete fragments remain angular and quite
coarse. The fragments look like lag rather than detritus
transported any significant distance by streams. The
overall gradual decrease in average size of fragment
from known source to valley axis is consistent with this
suggestion. Improbable though it may seem, the gibber
of the Stony Desert most likely originated in a sheet,
probably as extensive as any known, and formed on a
plain disturbed by continued gentle warping (WOPFNER
1978). Probably there were also deposits of particularly
massive silcrete in major valleys (many of which re-
sisted subsequent erosion to become the present mesas),
but the present landscape appears to have evolved
through the incision of rivers and subsequent scarp

Rowl C. Twidale and Jennifer A. Bourne: Sturts Stony Desert, central Australia 413

shelf puff crab hole shelf

0

1

1

2

metre

1 3 5 7 metres

A
B1

B2B3

C C

B2
A B1

B2 B3

   A      Eluvial horizon  = loamy clay

  B1      Illuvial horizon   = heavy clay

  B2      Illuvial horizon   = heavy clay with nodular calcium carbonate

B2B3   Illuvial horizon   = heavy clay with calcium carbonate and gypsum

    C      Parent material = Riverina alluvium

Fig. 7: Diagrammatic section through gilgai puff and depres-
sion (ENGLAND, in HOWARD 1939)

Profil durch das gilgai-Relief



recession acting on a sheet of siliceous duricrust which
was essentially contiguous over huge areas of what is
now northeastern South Australia and adjacent parts of
Queensland and New South Wales.

The putative Oligocene-Miocene age of the Stony
Desert silcrete implies that the extraordinarily flat and
compact duricrust found over much of the area has
evolved through the winnowing and introduction of
fines in the last 20–25 millions of years. Taking the
distance the gibber plain extends from the base of
silcrete-capped mesas, scarp retreat in the order of one
metre per millennium is implied. This order of magni-
tude does not take account of the outer limits of the
gibber being covered by dune sand (e. g. TWIDALE et al.
2001), nor does it make allowance for any decrease in
rate of recession with time due to the reduction of
catchment and runoff above the mesa scarps (TWIDALE
1978).

7 Some practical considerations

STURT (1849, 375) described the Stony Desert as an
adamantine, or impenetrably hard, plain, and certainly
silcrete, being composed mainly of quartz, is physically
hard and in the present arid environment practically
inert. Only in topographic lows (valleys, playa depres-
sions) where saline groundwaters gravitate or in pied-
mont zones where occasional runoff is concentrated, is
silica leached resulting in rinds or fissures from which
the matrix has been partly evacuated (in solution), leav-
ing a porous quartzite. The concentration of stones
through the winnowing of fines by wind and wash to
form a virtually continuous cover is another important
factor. Increased stoniness (number of stones per unit
area) induces greater accumulation of any fines that are
in motion on the wind (PANDASTICO a. ASHAYE 1956) so
that the more stones, the more rapidly are the spaces
between stones filled and the compactness of the cover
increased. Low in the local relief, wash also causes any
depressions to be filled in (e. g. DENNY 1967). A com-
pact, smooth surface provides a more effective pro-
tection than a rough one with stones projecting and
inducing turbulence.

Despite their protected character, however, gibber
plains in general and Sturts Stony Desert in particular,
are not immune to erosion. On the contrary, as well as
an almost imperceptible but nevertheless real general
lowering of the surface by wash and wind (e. g. CHEPIL
1950; SHARON 1962; SYMMONS a. HEMMING 1968) 
on higher areas – but accumulation of fines between
gibbers downslope of downwind – gullying develops
through natural erosion on even the gentlest of inclines

(1º or more) following heavy rains. The brownish clays
derived from transported kaolinite are vesicular and
prone to piping and collapse. Once the protective gib-
ber veneer is breached, erosion is rapid (Photo 9 a).
Wheels or pads cause localised compaction of the sub-
strate, producing linear zones of reduced infiltration
capacity, which stand in contrast with adjacent areas.
Wheels depress the surface and create comparatively
smooth hydraulically efficient linear depressions. Win-
drows (the ridges of detritus built up at the margins of
tracks by graders) impede and control drainage, but
when they are breached give rise to miniature floods.
Animal pads concentrated along fences, for example, or
converging on watering points, have similar physical
effects.

Whatever their causation, such compacted zones are
readily eroded by the occasional runoff – for no desert
is rainless and the Australian deserts are no exception –
to produce gullies (e. g. WEBB 1983). Washed-out tracks
(Photo 9 b) are frequently encountered in the Stony
Desert, as they are throughout the Australian arid zone.
They attest to the reality of erosion being induced by
soil compaction. The fines transported during the
formation of gullies is spread on lower slopes, and in
some instances gives rise to shallow but distinct alluvial
fans (Photo 9 c).

In addition water evidently flushes through the soil
just beneath the stony veneer with its associated hard-
ened clay crust, for fines are washed downslope, in
places forming a thin spead of alluvium downslope but
elsewhere creating scallop-shaped depressions which
extend from the stream line upslope.

In some areas the regeneration of eroded hamada
results from stones being encountered as the surface is
lowered, or are thrust to the surface by expansive clays
(e. g. ELVIDGE a. IVERSON 1983; ENGEL a. SHARP 1958),
but in the Stony Desert lack of a mixed calibre sub-
strate below the surficial stone carapace rules out such
repair and healing.

The physical characteristics of the gibber plains
make road construction difficult. Unless the road sur-
face can be raised above the level of adjacent areas, and
drainage channels constructed on either side, sealed
(bituminised) road construction is difficult in such areas.
Sturts Stony Desert is traversed by the Birdsville Track,
a gravel road which runs SSW unsealed for more than
500 km between just east of Birdsville, from its junction
with the west-east Birdsville Developmental Road, and
Marree, and another 80 km south to the bitumen at
Lyndhurst. Road engineers are faced with a dilemma
the solution of which is costly. The road has to be
cleared of gibber, for the irregular surface produced by
the scattered coarse blocks not only play havoc with the

414 Erdkunde Band 56/2002



suspension of motor vehicles but the sharp edges of the
silcrete fragments cut tyres. Thus, the track bed must be
excavated and lowered. In rain, however, it becomes 
a ready-made drain, and is converted into a muddy
morass which is susceptible to scouring and gullying. If,
on the other hand, the road surface were to be raised by
building up the bed with fines they would be washed
away unless artificially confined by roadside walls. Bitu-
minising a raised surface is the only practical solution,
but in order to avoid or minimise disruption by gilgai
effects, a thick (more than one metre) stable foundation
would have to be constructed (HALLSWORTH et al. 1955;
HUBBLE et al. 1983). Moreover, water draining from the
sealed surface would have to be directed safely to sur-
face or subsurface collecting and storage sites. Such
reservoirs would be useful for livestock. Nonetheless,
such road construction would be expensive. On the
other hand, the present dirt roads are unreliable, dan-
gerous, hard on vehicles and drivers, and expensive to
maintain.

8 Conclusion

The gibber plains that constitute Sturts Stony Desert
are protected and preserved by a carapace that in most
areas consists of coarse fragments of silcrete derived
from the disintegration of extensive sheets of that mate-
rial. Only in a few areas has the gibber been reduced 
to small fragments and the intervening spaces filled by
fines to produce a stone pavement. The gibber mantle
has been spread over what is possibly an etch plain du-
ring an extended period of scarp retreat, during which
the disintegrated silcrete capping was deposited under
gravity as a lag.

According to some evidence, silcrete is a humid warm
climate development, but it is preserved in aridity. The
hamada or stony desert derived from it, however, is a
desert feature, and is due to the presence of massive
country rocks which break down into coarse fragments
and form a lag deposit. Wind and water maintain the
lag on higher ground though alluviation occurs on
lower slopes and in river valleys. Churning takes place
in the stony deserts of central Australia but is not criti-
cal to the development of gibber plains. Sturts Stony
Desert is an hamada that is deservedly notorious for the
problems it has posed and still presents to travellers. It
is a forbidding region, “an unearthly prismatic land-
scape” (MOOREHEAD 1963, 212), which, however, holds
considerable geomorphological interest for the silcrete
hamada is unusual, if not unique, and produces dis-
tinctive characteristics in detail.

Rowl C. Twidale and Jennifer A. Bourne: Sturts Stony Desert, central Australia 415

Photo 9: (a) Gullies in bluff developed in kaolinised rock
beneath silcrete capping and on gibber-strewn slope, near
Bedourie, southwest Queensland. (b) Washed out track
near Cordillo Downs, between Birdsville and Innamincka.
(c) Gully developed on seismic shotline, and related alluvial
fan, northeast of Innamincka

(a) Gullies in einer Felsenklippe, entstanden in kaolini-
siertem, von silcrete überdecktem Gestein; der Hang ist 
mit gibber überzogen; in der Nähe von Bedourie, Süd-
west Queensland, (b) ausgewaschener Pfad in der Nähe
der Cordillo Downs, zwischen Birdsville und Innamincka.
(c) gully mit Schwemmfächer entlang einer seismischen
Bruchlinie, nordöstlich von Innamincka



Acknowledgements

The paper resulted from a long-time interest in arid
regions, and in recent years has been developed inci-
dentally to Simpson Desert dunefield studies funded by
the National Geographical Society, Washington D.C.
(Grant #5906-97). Consideration of erosion occasioned
by human activities in the Stony Desert was undertaken
in collaboration with colleagues from the Department
of Primary Industry and Resources, South Australia.
The authors gratefully acknowledge the support and
cooperation of all involved.

References

ACQUAYE, D. a. TINSLEY, J. (1965): Soluble silica in soils. In:
HALLSWORTH, E. G. a. CRAWFORD, D. V. (Eds.): Experi-
mental Pedology. London, 126–148.

ALLAN, R. J. (1990): Climate. In: TYLER, M. J.; TWIDALE,
C. R.; DAVIES, M. a. WELLS, C. B. (Eds.): Natural History
of the North East Deserts. Adelaide, 81–84.

BENNETT, P. C. (1991): Quartz dissolution in organic-rich
aqueous systems. In: Geochemica Cosmochemica Acta 55,
1781–1797.

BLACKWELDER, E. (1933): The insolation hypothesis of rock
weathering. In: American Journal of Science 26, 97–113.

BONYTHON, C. W. a. MASON, B. (1953): The filling and dry-
ing of Lake Eyre. In: Geographical Journal 119, 321–330.

BOURNE, J. A. a. TWIDALE, C. R. (1998): Pediments and fans:
genesis and relationships in the western piedmont of the
Flinders Ranges, South Australia. In: Australian Journal of
Earth Sciences 45, 123–135.

BROWN, D.A.; CAMPBELL, K.S.W. a. CROOK, K.A.W. (1968):
Geological Evolution of Australia and New Zealand. Ox-
ford.

BRYAN, K. (1940): Gully gravure – a method of slope retreat.
In: Journal of Geomorphology 3, 89–107.

CARTER, E. K. a. ÖPIK, A. A. (1959): Geological Map of North-
western Queensland. Bureau of Mineral Resources, Can-
berra / Geological Survey of Queensland, Brisbane.

CHEPIL, W. S. (1950): Properties of soil which influence wind
erosion: the governing principle of surface roughness. In:
Soil Science 69, 149–162.

COATS, R. P.; HORWITZ, R. C.; CRAWFORD, A. R.; CAMPANA,
B. a. THATCHER, D. (1969): Mount Painter Province. Geo-
logical Atlas Special 1:125,000 Series, South Australia.

COOKE, R.; WARREN, A. a. GOUDIE, A. (1993): Desert Geo-
morphology. London.

DAVIS, S. N. (1964): Silica in streams and groundwater. In:
American Journal of Science 262, 870–891.

DENNY, C. S. (1967): Fans and pediments. In: American
Journal of Science 256, 81–105.

DOUGLAS, I. (1978): Denudation in silicate rocks in the humid
tropics. In: DAVIES, J. L. a. WILLIAMS, M. A. J. (Eds.): Land-
form Evolution in Australasia. Canberra, 216–237.

DULHUNTY, J. A. (1987): Salina-bed instability and geodetic
studies at Lake Eyre, South Australia. In: Transactions of
the Royal Society of South Australia 111, 183–188.

DURY, G. H. (1970): Morphometry of gibber gravel at Mt
Sturt, New South Wales. In: Journal of the Geological
Society of Australia 16, 655–666.

ELVIDGE, C. D. a. IVERSON, R. M. (1983): Regeneration of
desert pavement and varnish. In: WEBB, R.H. a. WILSHIRE,
H. G. (Eds.): Environmental Effects of Off-Road Vehicles.
Impacts and Management in Arid Regions. New York,
245–264.

ENGEL, C. G. a. SHARP, R. P. (1958): Chemical data on desert
varnish. In: Geological Society of America Bulletin 69,
487–518.

FALCONER, J. D. (1911): The Geology and Geography of
Northern Nigeria. London.

FORBES, B. G. (1974): Kopperamanna. Sheet SH 54–1 Zones 
5 & 6. Geological Atlas 1:250,000 Series, South Australia.

FRAKES, L. A. (1979): Climates Through Geologic Time.
Amsterdam.

FRAKES, L. A.; FRANCIS, J. E. a. SYKTUS, J. I. (1992): Climate
Modes of the Phanerozoic. Cambridge.

FRANKEL, J. J. a. KENT, L. E. (1937): Grahamstown surface
quartzites (silcretes). In: Transactions of the Geological
Society of South Africa 40, 1–42.

GRIGGS, D. T. (1936): The factor of fatigue in rock exfolia-
tion. In: Journal of Geology 44, 783–796.

HALLSWORTH, E. G.; ROBERTSON, G. K. a. GIBBONS, F. R.
(1955): Studies in pedogenesis in New South Wales. VII.
The gilgai soils. In: Journal of Soil Science 6, 1–31.

HOWARD, A. (1939): Crab-hole, gilgai and self-mulching soils
of the Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area. In: Pedology 8,
14–18.

HUBBLE, G. D.; ISBELL, R. F. a. NORTHCOTE, K. H. (1983):
Features of Australian soils. In: Soils. An Australian View-
point. Melbourne, London, 17–47.

HUTTON, J. T.; TWIDALE, C. R.; MILNES, A. R. a. ROSSER H.
(1972): Composition and genesis of silcretes and silcrete
skins from the Beda valley, southern Arcoona Plateau,
South Australia. In: Journal of the Geological Society of
Australia 19, 31–39.

HUTTON, J. T.; TWIDALE, C. R. a. MILNES, A. R. (1978):
Characteristics and origin of some Australian silcretes. In:
LANGFORD-SMITH, T. (Ed.): Silcrete in Australia. Armidale,
NSW, 19–39.

JESSUP, R. W. (1970): The Stony Tableland soils of the south-
eastern portion of the Australian arid zone and their evo-
lutionary history. In: Journal of Soil Science 11, 188–196.

JOLY, J. (1901): Expériences sur la dénudation par dissolution
dans l’eau douce et l’eau de mer. In: Proceedings of the 8th
International Geological Congress (Paris), 774–784.

JUTSON, J. T. (1914): An outline of the physiographical geo-
logy (physiography) of Western Australia. In: Geological
Survey of Western Australia Bulletin 61.

KOTWICKI, V. (1986): Floods of Lake Eyre. Engineering and
Water Supply Department, Adelaide, 1986.

LEEPER, G. W. (1947): Introduction to Soil Science. Mel-
bourne.

416 Erdkunde Band 56/2002



LIVINGSTONE, D. A. (1963): Chemical composition of rivers
and lakes. In: United States Geological Survey Professional
Paper 4409.

LOVERING, T. S. (1959): Significance of accumulator plants in
rock weathering. In: Geological Society of America Bulle-
tin 70, 781–800.

LUDBROOK, N. H. (1969): Tertiary Period. In: PARKIN, L. W.
(Ed.): Handbook of South Australian Geology. Adelaide,
172–203.

MABBUTT, J. A. (1961): ‘Basal surface’ or ‘weathering front’.
In: Proceedings of the Geologists’ Association London 72,
357–358.

– (1965): The weathered land surface in central Australia.
In: Zeitschrift für Geomorphologie 9, 82–114.

– (1977): Desert Landforms. Canberra.
MCFADDEN, L. D.; WELLS, S. G. a. JERCINOVICH, M. J. (1987):

Influences of eolian and pedogenic processes on the origin
and evolution of desert pavements. In: Geology 15,
504–508.

MOOREHEAD, A. (1963): Cooper’s Creek. London.
NORRISH, K. a. PICKERING, J. G. (1983): Clay minerals. In:

Soils, An Australian Viewpoint. Melbourne, London,
281–308.

ÖPIK, A. A. (1954): Mesozoic plant-bearing sandstones of the
Camooweal region and the origin of freshwater quartzite
(Abstract of talk presented Bureau of Mineral Resources,
Canberra).

ÖPIK, A. A.; CARTER, E. K. a. RANDAL, M. A. (1973): Notes
on the First Edition Camooweal Geological Sheet Queens-
land, 1961. In: Bureau of Mineral Resources, Geology and
Geophysics Record 1973/83.

OLLIER, C. D. (1963): Insolation weathering: examples from
central Australia. In: American Journal of Science 261,
376–381.

– (1966): Desert gilgai. In: Nature 212, 581–583.
PANDASTICO, E. B. a. ASHAYE, T. I. (1956): Demonstration of

the effect of stone layer on soil transport and accretion. In:
HALLSWORTH, E. G. a. CRAWFORD, D. V. (Eds.): Experi-
mental Pedology. London, 384–390.

PARTRIDGE, T. C. a. MAUD, R. R. (1987): Geomorphic evolu-
tion of southern Africa since the Mesozoic. In: Transac-
tions of the Geological Society of South Africa 90, 179–208.

PIRSA (Primary Industries and Resources South Australia)
(2001): Cordillo. Sheet 7044. 1:100,000 Geological Survey,
South Australia.

PRESCOTT, J. A. (1931): The Soils of Australia in Relation to
Vegetation and Climate. Council for Scientific and Indus-
trial Research Bulletin 52.

RUSSELL, M. B. (1957): Physical properties. In: Soil. The
Yearbook of Agriculture USDA. Washington D.C., 31–38.

SHARON, D. (1962): On the nature of hamadas in Israel. In:
Zeitschrift für Geomorphologie 6, 129–147.

SPRIGG, R. C. (1963): Geology and petroleum prospects of
the Simpson Desert. In: Transactions of the Royal Society
of South Australia 86, 35–66.

SPRINGER, M. (1958): Desert pavement and vesicular layer of
some soils of the Lahontan Basin, Nevada. In: Proceedings
of the Soil Scientific Society of America 22, 63–66.

STEPHENS, C. G. (1964): Silcretes of central Australia. In:
Nature 203, 1407.

STIRTON, R. A.; TEDFORD, R. H. a. MILLER, A. H. (1961):
Cainozoic stratigraphy and vertebrate palaeontology of
the Tirari Desert, South Australia. In: Records of the
South Australian Museum 14, 19–61.

STURT, C. (1849): Narrative of an Expedition into Central
Australia performed under the Authority of Her Majesty’s
Government during the years 1844, 5, and 6. London.

SYMMONS, P. M. a. HEMMING, C. F. (1968): A note on wind
stable stone mantles in the southern Sahara. In: Geo-
graphical Journal 134, 60–64.

TAYLOR, G.; TAYLOR, G. R.; BINK, M.; FOUDOULIS, C.; GOR-
DON, I.; HEDSTROM, J.; MINELLO, J. a. WHIPPY, F. (1985):
Pre-basaltic topography of the northern Monaro and its
implications. In: Australian Journal of Earth Sciences 32,
65–71.

TOWNSEND, R. J. a. THORNTON, R. C. N. (1975): Innamincka.
Sheet SG 54–14 Zone 6. Geological Atlas 1:250,000
Series, South Australia.

TWIDALE, C. R. (1972): Landform development in the Lake
Eyre region, Australia. In: Geographical Review 62, 40–70.

– (1978): On the origin of pediments in different structural
settings. In: American Journal of Science 278, 1138–1176.

– (1983): Australian laterites and silcretes: ages and signifi-
cance. In: Revue de Géologie Dynamique et Géographie
Physique 24, 35–45.

– (1985): Old land surfaces and their implications for models
of landscape evolution. In: Revue de Géomorphologie
Dynamique 34, 131–147.

– (1990): The origin and implications of some erosional
landforms. In: Journal of Geology 98, 343–364.

– (2002): The two-stage concept of landform and landscape
development involving etching: origin, development and
implications of an idea. In: Earth-Science Reviews 57,
37–74.

TWIDALE, C. R. a. BOURNE, J. A. (1996): Development of the
land surface. In: DAVIES, M.; TWIDALE, C. R. a. TYLER,
M. J. (Eds.): Natural History of the Flinders Ranges.
Adelaide, 46–62.

TWIDALE, C. R. a. CAMPBELL, E. M. (1986): Localised inver-
sion on steep hillslopes: gully gravure in weak and in resist-
ant rocks. In: Zeitschrift für Geomorphologie 30, 35–46.

TWIDALE, C. R. a. MILNES, A. R. (1983a): Slope processes
active late in arid scarp retreat. In: Zeitschrift für Geo-
morphologie 27, 343–361.

– (1983b): An overview of silicification in Cainozoic land-
scapes of arid central and southern Australia. In: Austra-
lian Journal of Soil Research 21, 387–410.

TWIDALE, C. R.; PRESCOTT, J. R.; BOURNE, J. A. a. WILLIAMS,
F. M. (2001): Age of desert dunes near Birdsville, southwest
Queensland. In: Quaternary Science Reviews 20 (12),
81–91.

VAN DIJK, D. C. a. BECKMANN, G. G. (1978): The Yuleba
Hardpan and its relationship to soil-geomorphic history, in
the Yuleba-Tara region, southeast Queensland. In: LANG-
FORD-SMITH, T. (Ed.): Silcrete in Australia. Armidale,
NSW, 73–91.

Rowl C. Twidale and Jennifer A. Bourne: Sturts Stony Desert, central Australia 417



ADLER, ELCHANAN NATHAN: Von Ghetto zu Ghetto. Be-
richte eines jüdischen Reisenden ausgangs des 19. Jahrhun-
derts. Nachwort und Erläuterungen von JOACHIM SCHLÖR.
240 S. und 73 Abb., Jüdische Memoiren 6. Hentrich und
Hentrich, Teetz 2001, “ 20,–

Der englische Jurist ELCHANAN NATHAN ADLER, Zeit-
genosse des Geographen Alfred Philippson, aber anders 
als dieser enger dem jüdischen Glauben und Leben ver-
bunden, bereiste im ausgehenden 19. Jahrhundert in einem
Zeitraum von zwanzig Jahren die weltumspannende jüdische
Diaspora. Seine Reiseberichte legte er in einer Geographica
Judaica nieder, in der er mit ethnographisch genauem Blick
und im Jurastudium geschulter wissenschaftlicher Akuratesse
das Leben der jüdischen Gemeinden in den unterschied-
lichsten Ländern beobachtete und, dies macht die beson-
dere Stärke des Buches aus, aus der inneren Perspektive 
des Judentums heraus beschrieb: Adler war stets mehr als 
der wissenschaftliche Beobachter, da er den soziokulturel-

len Kontext von innen heraus, als Jude unter Juden lesen
konnte.

Aus der akutellen Sicht ist sein Blick auf die jüdischen Ge-
meinden im Nahen Osten und ihre arabischen Nachbarn von
besonderem Interesse. Nicht weniger aufschlussreich sind
seine Beschreibungen des jüdischen Lebens in Persien, Russ-
land, Indien und Argentinien. Was ADLERs Werk für den 
(historischen) Geographen so besonders macht, ist der
„sozialgeographische” Blick des Autors. Seine Reisen nutzte
der bibliophile ADLER auch zum Sammeln von hebräischen
Inkunablen und Altdrucken, die seit 1923 als Sammlung im
Jewish Theological Seminary in New York liegen.

ADLERs Werk, 1909 erstmals – im englischen Original
unter dem neutraleren Titel “Jews in many Lands” – erschie-
nen, wurde neu aufgelegt und mit einem informativen Nach-
wort von JOACHIM SCHLÖR versehen, das Wissenslücken
schließt, biographische Eckdaten nennt und in einem Glossar
weniger zugängliche Begriffe erläutert. ASTRID MEHMEL

418 Erdkunde Band 56/2002

WEBB, R. H. (1983): Compaction of desert soils by off-road
vehicles. In: WEBB, R. H. a. WILSHIRE, H. G. (Eds.): Envi-
ronmental Effects of Off-Road Vehicles. Impacts and
Management in Arid Regions. New York, 51–79.

WHITEHOUSE, F. W. (1941): The surface of western Queens-
land. In: Proceedings of the Royal Society of Queensland
53, 1–22.

WILLIAMS, A. F. (1973): Pandie Pandie. Sheet SG 54–9 Zones 5
& 6. Geological Atlas 1:250,000 Series, South Austra-
lia.

WILLIAMS, A. F. a. MOND A. (1973): Gason. Sheet SG 54–13
Zones 5 & 6. Geological Atlas 1:250,000 Series, South
Australia.

WILLS, W. (Ed.) (1863): A successful exploration through 
the interior of Australia, from Melbourne to the Gulf of
Carpentaria; from the journals and letters of William John
Wills. London.

WOPFNER, H. (1960): On some structural development in the
central part of the Great Australian Artesian Basin. In:
Transactions of the Royal Society of South Australia 83,
179–194.

– (1974): Post-Eocene history and stratigraphy of north-
eastern South-Australia. In: Transactions of the Royal
Society of South Australia 98, 1–12.

– (1978): Silcretes of northern South Australia and adjacent
regions. In: LANGFORD-SMITH, T. (Ed.): Silcrete in Austra-
lia. Armidale, NSW, 93–141.

WOPFNER, H. a. TWIDALE, C. R. (1967): Geomorphological
History of the Lake Eyre Basin. In: JENNINGS, J. N. a. MAB-
BUTT, J. A. (Eds.): Landform Studies from Australia and
New Guinea. Canberra, 117–143.

WRIGHT, M. J.; FITZPATRICK, R. W. a. WELLS, C. B. (1990):
Soils. In: TYLER, M. J.; TWIDALE, C. R.; DAVIES, M. a.
WELLS, C. B. (Eds.): Natural History of the North East
Deserts. Adelaide, 61–74.

WRIGHT, R. L. (1963): Deep weathering and erosion surfaces
in the Daly River Basin, Northern Territory. In: Journal of
the Geological Society of Australia 10, 151–164.

YOUNG, R. W. (1985): Silcrete distribution in eastern Austra-
lia. In: Zeitschrift für Geomorphologie 29, 21–36.

YOUNG, R. W. a. MCDOUGALL, I. (1993): Long-term land-
sacope evolution, Early Miocene and modern rivers in
southern New South Wales. In: Journal of Geology 101,
35–49.

YOUNGS, B. C. a. WOPFNER, H. (1972): Subsurface faults and
recent earthquakes in the Simpson Desert. Geological
Survey of South Australia Quarterly Geological Notes 43,
8–11.

B U C H B E S P R E C H U N G E N