GEOÖKO BANDVOLUME XXI, 41 - 64 BENSHEIM 2000

UNTERSUCHUNGEN ZU LANDSCHAFTSDYNAMIK 
IN AGRARISCH GENUTZTEN GEBIETEN DER PROVINZ 

CIUDAD DE LA HABANA/CUBA

OTFRIED BAUME, THOMAS AMMERL, MARK VETTER & MANUEL BOLLO, 
MÜNCHEN

SUMMARY

The analyses of the vertical and lateral nutrient and sediment transport were carried out on test si­
tes, which were installed in the catchment area of a lake in a karst depression south of Havana. The 
area concerned is under agricultural use. The lateral sediment transport, i.e. the soil erosion on the 
test sites, was studied with regard to its quality and quantity, and also with regard to its depen­
dence on natural and anthropogenic parameters. Based on the results of the field measurements 
and on topographic, soil and precipitation data a map of the susceptibility to soil erosion was pro­
duced by means of a geographical information system (GIS).

The analyses of the vertical and lateral nutrient transport, i.e. nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium 
dynamics, were studied at the same sites. In addition, all agrotechnical and agrochemical data, as 
e.g. method of cultivation, dates of sowing, harvest and fertilization, quantity and type of fertil­
izer, were registered. The monthly nutrient analyses showed a distinct correlation between the nu­
trient dynamics and fertilization and precipitation conditions, as well as differences in the nutrient 
mobility. Pedological differences of the individual sites were of lesser importance.

Our recommendations for an effective and also ecological agriculture in the test area, which are 
based on the analyses of landscape structure and dynamics as well as the analysis of the land use 
structure, are referring to:

• possibilities to improve the organisation and land use structures
• possibilities to increase the efficiency of the analysed field and fruit crops
• the balance between performance and environmental stress factors.

Finally, the landscape dynamics of intensively cultivated areas under humid tropical and temperate 
climatic conditions were compared. It turned out that similar anthropogenic actions in intensively 
cultivated areas will lead to similar processes of vertical and lateral transport, even if the natural 
conditions and influencing factors were in parts strongly different. This means that the compara­
ble human influence in form of agrotechnical and agrochemical actions is dominating the different 
climatic and pedological conditions, at least in a similar topographic situation (basin).



64 BAUME, AMMERL, VETTER & BOLLO

auf die Nährstoffdynamik Einfluß nahmen. Die Leistungs- und Belastungseffekte als Folge des 
Einsatzes von Agrochemikalien waren in beiden Untersuchungsgebieten gleich, wobei die Ertrags­
steigerung der Kulturpflanzen (Leistungseffekt) in keinem Verhältnis zu der eingebrachten Dün­
germenge stand, die als Belastungseffekte Nährstoffanreicherung im Boden, vertikalen und late­
ralen Nährstofftransport sowie Verlandung, Eutrophierung und Sedimentation in den Zentren der 
Beckenräumen mit sich brachte.

LITERATUR

AMMERL, T. (1997): Untersuchungen zu Bodenerosion in einem landwirtschaftlich intensiv­
genutzten Gebiet in der Provinz Ciudad de La Habana/Cuba. Diplomarbeit an der Bayerischen 
Julius-Maximilian-Universität Würzburg.

AMMERL, T., BAUME, O. u. a. (1998): Ökologische und ökonomische Fragen ausgewählter 
Landschaften auf Cuba. In: Arbeitsberichte Geographisches Institut der Humboldt-Universität 
zu Berlin, H. 32.

BAUME, O. (1991): Zur Erfassung und Kennzeichnung der Landschaftsdynamik in intensiv und 
mehrfach genutzten Landschaften des norddeutschen Jungmoränengebietes. In: Peterm. Geogr. 
Mitt., 135: 113 - 120.

BAUME, O., BASTIAN, O. und M. RÖDER (1994): Entwicklung und Stand der geographischen 
Landschaftsforschung in Kuba. In: Peterm. Geogr. Mitt., 138: 235 - 244.

BOLLO, M. (1997): Degradación Geoecologica de Areas Periurbanas de la Habana. In: Ordena­
miento Geoecologico de los Paisajes, II. Taller. Habana. S. 80-91.
BURCHARDT, H.-J. (1996): Kuba - Der lange Abschied von einem Mythos, Stuttgart.

FEBLES, J.M. (1988): La erosión de los suelos en las regiones cársicas de la provincia La Habana.
Instituto Superior de Ciencias Agropecuarias de La Habana (ISCAH). Ciudad de La Habana. 

HENKEL, K. (1996): Kuba zwischen Plan und Markt. Die Transformation zur „dualen Wirt­
schaft“ seit 1985, Hamburg.

INSTITUTO DE GEOGRAFIA DE LA ACADEMIA DE CIENCIAS DE CUBA (1989): Nuevo 
Atlas Nacional de Cuba. Edit. Instituto Geográfico Nacional de España. Madrid.

MATEO, J. (1996): Situación medioambiental de Cuba y Perspectivas de Aplikacion de los Prin- 
cipos del Desarrollo Sustentable. In: Estudios Geográficos, Tomo LVII Nr. 223. Madrid 
S. 219-243.

MINISTERIO DE AGRICULTURA - MINAGRI (1984): Manual de Interpretación de los suelos 
de Cuba. Ciudad de La Habana.

RODRIGUEZ GARCIA, J.L. (1992): La economía de Cuba ante la cambiante conyuntura interna­
cional II. Boletín de información sobre economía Cubana, 2: 2-12.

VETTER, M. (1998): Untersuchungen zur vertikalen und horizontalen Nährstoffdynamik in einem 
agrarisch genutzten Gebiet der Provinz Ciudad de la Habana/Cuba. In: Terra Nostra. Schriften 
der Alfred-Wegener-Stiftung, H. 5.

ZUIDAM, R.A. (1986): Aerial Photo-Interpretation in Terrain Analysis and Geomorphologie 
Mapping. The Hague.

Eingang des Manuskripts: 05.11.1999 
Annahme des Manuskripts: 26.12.1999

Anschrift der Autoren
Prof. Dr. Otfried Baume, Dipl. Geogr. Thomas Ammerl, Dipl. Geogr. Mark Vetter, Ludwig- 
Maximilians-Universität München, Institut für Geographie, Luisenstr. 37, 80333 München 
Prof. Dr. Manuel Bollo Manent, Universität Havanna, Geographische Fakultät