Wissenschaftlicher Beitrag

Received: 20 June 2013 / Accepted: 21 February 2014 / Published online: 11 April 2014
© The Author(s) 2014. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com

Building Resilient Regions: Complex Adaptive Systems  
and the Role of Policy Intervention

Gillian Bristow · Adrian Healy

Raumforsch Raumordn (2014) 72:93–102
DOI 10.1007/s13147-014-0280-0

Der Aufbau resilienter Regionen: komplexe adaptive 
Systeme und die Rolle der politischen Intervention

Zusammenfassung Der Begriff Resilienz wird von einer 
zunehmenden Anzahl von Autoren verwendet, die ein Ver-
ständnis für die Dynamik lokaler und regionaler Wirtschaf-
ten anstreben und die nachvollziehen wollen, wie diese 
Wirtschaften mit ökonomischen Schocks und Rezessions-
krisen umgehen. In dieser umfangreichen Literatur wird al-
lerdings bislang wenig die Entwicklung eines tragfähigen 
konzeptionellen Verständnis betrachtet, das die mögliche 
Rolle politischer Entscheidungsträger beim Aufbau regio-
nalökonomischer Resilienz insbesondere auf der subnatio-
nalen Ebene beleuchtet. Ziel dieses Beitrages ist es diese 
Lücke zu schließen. Anhand von Arbeiten zur Resilienz, 
die die Perspektive komplexer adaptiver Systeme einneh-
men, strebt der Beitrag an, einen konzeptuellen Rahmen 
für die Theoriebildung und das Verständnis von politischer 
Handlung unter besonderer Berücksichtigung der sub-
nationalen Ebene zu erarbeiten. Es werden drei kritische 
Dimensionen identifiziert, die den Rahmen setzen für die 
Rolle und den Handlungsspielraum politischer Intervention 
bei der Steuerung regionalökonomischer Resilienz: For-
men und Strukturen der Governance, Resilienz fördernde 
Arten politischer Intervention sowie der Horizont und die 
Zeitpunkte geeigneter Intervention. Der Beitrag schließt 
mit einer Betrachtung der Bedeutung dieses Rahmens für 
Art und Umfang subnationaler politischer Intervention im 
Zusammenhang von regionalökonomischer Resilienz.

Schlüsselwörter Resilienz · Handlungsfähigkeit · 
Politik · komplexe Systeme

Abstract The notion of resilience is being utilised by an 
increasing number of authors keen to understand the dy-
namics of local and regional economies and particularly 
how they deal with economic shocks and recessionary 
crises. Within the burgeoning literature however, fairly 
limited attention has been paid to date to developing a ro-
bust conceptual understanding of what role policy-makers, 
particularly at sub-national level, might play in building 
economic resilience in regions. The purpose of this paper 
is to address this gap. Drawing on resilience literatures 
which employ a complex adaptive systems perspective, 
the paper seeks to develop a conceptual framework within 
which policy action, particularly at the subnational level, 
can be theorised and understood. It identifies three criti-
cal dimensions which frame the role and scope for policy 
intervention in the management of regional economic re-
silience: the modes and structures of governance, the types 
of policy interventions which help build resilience, and the 
horizons or timings for appropriate intervention. The paper 
concludes by considering what this framing means for the 
nature and scope of subnational policy intervention for re-
gional economic resilience.

Keywords Resilience · Agency · Policy · 
Complex systems

Prof. G. Bristow, Ph.D. () · Dr. A. Healy
Cardiff School of Planning and Geography, Cardiff University,
Glamorgan Building, King Edward VII Avenue,
Cardiff CF10 3WA, UK
e-mail: Bristowg1@cardiff.ac.uk

Dr. A. Healy
e-mail: Healya5@cardiff.ac.uk



94 G. Bristow, A. Healy

1  Introduction

The notion of resilience is being utilised by an increasing 
number of authors keen to understand the dynamics of local 
and regional economies and particularly how they deal with 
economic shocks and recessionary crises (see, for example, 
Christopherson/Michie/Tyler 2010; Pendall/Foster/Cowell 
2010; Hill/St. Clair/Wial et al. 2011). Most people have an 
intuitive notion of what resilience means: the capacity to 
sustain a shock, recover, and continue to function and, more 
generally, cope with change (Walker/Holling/Carpenter 
et al. 2004: 5). Within the burgeoning literature however, 
fairly limited attention has been paid to date to developing 
a robust conceptual understanding of what role policy-mak-
ers, particularly at sub-national level, might play in building 
economic resilience in regions. A growing number of empir-
ical studies have highlighted the role which can be played 
by regional and local authorities in encouraging or indeed 
hindering territorial adaptation to new socio-economic real-
ities (e.g. Brookings Institution/London School of Econom-
ics/Deutsche Bank Research 2010; Hervas-Oliver/Jackson/
Tomlinson 2011), whilst more theoretically-oriented papers 
such as that of Martin (2012) have suggested that economic 
and political reforms may build resilience. However, most 
fall short of exploring these in detail.

This gap reflects a broader critique of existing studies of 
regional economic resilience, largely based within a par-
ticular strand of evolutionary economic geography, which 
have tended to emphasise the structural factors shaping 
regional resilience outcomes over the role played by human 
action and agency (Bristow/Healy 2013). In particular, it 
has been recognised that “recent departures in evolutionary 
economic geography help us understand better the evolu-
tionary, diverse and multi-level dimension of regional sys-
tems, but still fall short in understanding policy design and 
implementation” (Uyarra 2010: 117). Yet policy-makers are 
increasingly keen to understand what modes of governance 
and forms of intervention might both facilitate post-shock 
recovery and protect regional economies from future eco-
nomic crises and change (Dawley/Pike/Tomaney 2010; 
McInroy/Longlands 2010; Lang 2011).

The purpose of this paper is to address this gap. Drawing 
on resilience literatures which employ a complex adaptive 
systems perspective, the paper seeks to develop a concep-
tual framework within which policy action, particularly at 
the regional level, can be theorised and understood. The 
meaning of ‘region’ here is typically understood in generic, 
conceptual terms and does not rely on or presuppose any 
specific definitions of a ‘regional economy’ which might 
guide analysis of particular empirical regions or spatial 
units under observation (Martin 2012). The paper is organ-
ised as follows. The next section develops the definition of 
regional economic resilience as an adaptive notion shaped, 

in part at least, by the actions and choices made by active 
human agents in the regional economic system. Section 3 
draws upon complex adaptive systems literature to identify 
three critical dimensions which frame the role and scope 
for policy intervention in the management of regional eco-
nomic resilience. These include the modes and structures 
of governance, the types of policy interventions which help 
build resilience, and the horizons or timings for appropriate 
intervention. The paper concludes by considering what this 
framing might mean for the nature and scope of subnational 
policy intervention for regional economic resilience.

2  Regional Economic Resilience: An Adaptive Concept

Within the developing literature on regional economic resil-
ience, a broad distinction can be made between two different 
conceptions of the term (Pendall/Foster/Cowell 2010). The 
first is based on the engineering conception of resilience 
which focuses on the resistance of a system to shocks and 
the speed of its return or ‘bounce-back’ to a pre-shock state 
or equilibrium. The faster the system returns to equilibrium, 
the more resilient it is (Holling 1996). This is deployed by 
Hill/St. Clair/Wial et al. (2011) in a study of regional eco-
nomic resilience in the US which they define as the ability 
of a regional or metropolitan economy to maintain or return 
to a pre-existing state in the presence of some kind of exter-
nally generated shock.

The second definition of regional economic resilience is 
based on an adaptive notion of resilience which derives from 
the theory of complex adaptive systems. These are systems 
which are characterised by complex non-linear dynamics 
and an adaptive capacity that enables them to re-arrange 
their internal structure spontaneously whether in response 
to an external shock or to some internal or “self-organised 
criticality” (Martin/Sunley 2007: 579). The adaptive notion 
of resilience challenges the whole idea of equilibrium and 
instead asserts that the seemingly stable states of nature or 
society can suddenly change and become something radi-
cally new, with profoundly different characteristics. Thus, 
resilience is not viewed as a return to normality, but rather 
as a dynamic, evolutionary capacity to adapt in response to 
stresses and strains. Furthermore, the dynamics of complex 
systems are non-linear, which generates path dependency 
or local rules of interaction that mean history shapes how 
the system evolves and develops into the future (Holland 
1992). This definition is preferred by scholars working 
within evolutionary economic geography (EEG) since it 
has clear resonance with evolutionary economic geogra-
phy thinking on the path-dependent, evolutionary and non-
equilibrium dynamics of regional economic development 
and indeed policy. Thus, for example, following an eco-
nomic shock, a return to ‘normal’ or a pre-shock state may 



95Building Resilient Regions: Complex Adaptive Systems and the Role of Policy Intervention

firm, and to underplay the critically important role played 
by the state in shaping socio-spatial structures and broader 
evolutionary trajectories (MacKinnon/Cumbers/Pike et al. 
2009; Hassink 2010).

There is a growing literature which explicitly examines 
how human agency interacts with complex system dynam-
ics in a range of different settings which provides critical 
insights into the important role agency plays. These include 
the management of social-ecological systems (e.g. Berkes/
Colding/Folke 2003; Lebel/Anderies/Campbell et al. 2006), 
as well as efforts to develop individual and community 
capacities to adapt to a range of adverse situations (such 
as natural disasters) (e.g. Berkes/Ross 2013). This litera-
ture has at its heart an understanding that complex adaptive 
social systems, whether they be coupled social-ecological 
environments, communities or economies, have a number 
of core defining features which critically influence how 
effectively and in what ways they may be governed or influ-
enced by policy.

Complex adaptive systems are comprised of groups of 
heterogeneous individuals or ‘agents’ (such as cells, con-
sumers, nations, atoms) between which are inherently 
dynamic relationships. The agents in complex adaptive 
systems are constantly reacting to what the other agents 
are doing and to the environment, and are thus continually 
evolving through feedback and learning. As a result of their 
interconnected structure, these systems exhibit unexpected 
emergent properties—these are structures or patterns that 
cannot be reduced to the properties of the agents them-
selves. One such emergent property is self-organisation, i.e. 
organisation that has no leader but is generated spontane-
ously from the ‘bottom-up’ by the individual decisions and 
interactions of the agents themselves. Control thus tends to 
be dispersed and decentralised. Furthermore, these complex 
self-organising systems are constantly adapting such that 
their adaptive capacity is not simply change in response to 
episodic events or conditions. It is the ability of systems—
households, people, communities, ecosystems, nations—to 
generate new ways of operating, new systemic relationships 
(Carpenter/Walker/Anderies et al. 2001). As such, resilience 
is not simply an end point or performance outcome: it is 
a process or an ongoing development capacity to adapt to 
change and thrive (Magis 2010).

Critically, in social systems human agency is at work. 
This is defined by Davidson (2010: 1142) as the realm 
within which humans deliberately and consciously act, 
network, imagine futures and make decisions between per-
ceived options. Acknowledging the role of human agency 
thus requires the analysis of resilience to be much less 
structurally deterministic and much more people-oriented 
and focused on understanding how human actions and 
behaviour interact with key structural and environmental 
factors and constraints (Bristow/Healy 2013; also Skerratt 

be neither possible (in the face of global restructuring, for 
example), nor desirable. Moreover, equilibrium approaches 
fail to say anything about how regional actors might prepare 
themselves to deal with future problems or learn from the 
mistakes made in response to previous challenges (Cowell 
2013). In contrast, this adaptive notion of resilience sees it 
as a dynamic attribute associated with a process of continual 
development (Pendall/Foster/Cowell 2010). The essence of 
adaptive resilience is an ability to change as circumstances 
change, to adapt and, where appropriate, transform rather 
than continuing to do the same thing faster and better (Gold-
stein/Taufen Wessells/Lejano et al. 2013).

Whilst different, these dual conceptualisations of resil-
ience share a common emphasis on defining resilience in 
terms of the functioning of the regional economy as a system. 
From this perspective regional economic resilience is con-
ceived as a multi-dimensional property embracing not only 
recovery, but also resistance, or the ability of regions to resist 
disruptive shocks in the first place, re-orientation, or the 
extent to which the region adapts its economic structure, and 
finally, renewal, or the degree to which the region resumes 
the growth path that characterised its economy prior to the 
shock (Martin 2012). Resilience is thus defined in terms of 
the system’s capacity to absorb, resist or respond to a distur-
bance and at least maintain its functioning, if not necessarily 
the same system structure (Carpenter/Walker/Anderies et al. 
2001: 766). As well as shaping the definition of resilience, 
this systems-based perspective also extends to its measure-
ment and analysis. Thus, from this perspective economically 
resilient and non-resilient regions are identified by examin-
ing the system’s overall economic performance over a period 
of time, with criteria for a negative economic shock defined, 
and pre- and post-shock growth rates and trajectories of out-
put and employment measured. Furthermore, analysis of the 
determinants of resilience then typically focuses upon the 
structure of the system whether through understanding how 
inherited regional production structures shape the sensitivity 
of regions to recessionary shocks and their subsequent recov-
ery (as Hill/St. Clair/Wial et al. 2011; Martin 2012), or how 
these structures exhibit distinct phases or adaptive cycles of 
change in line with complex ecological systems such as pan-
archy (Simmie/Martin 2010). Regional economic resilience 
from a systems perspective is thus understood principally in 
relation to the system’s structure, performance and overall 
functioning (Martin 2012).

Whilst valuable in highlighting the potential for resilience 
to illuminate how regional economies respond to economic 
disruptions, this system and structure emphasis has resulted 
in much less attention being paid to understanding the role 
of human agency in the adaptation at the heart of regional 
economic resilience. This reflects a broader critique against 
evolutionary economic geography studies which have 
tended to neglect the agency of actor-networks beyond the 



96 G. Bristow, A. Healy

upon the perceptions of the agents involved and their over-
all goals and objectives (e.g. Hill/St. Clair/Wial et al. 2011; 
Shaw 2012). This leads Pike/Dawley/Tomaney (2010: 66) 
to ask “what kind of resilience and for whom” and to note 
that state authorities often exert powerful roles in “script-
ing” dominant resilience narratives.

A complex, adaptive view of resilience thus raises a num-
ber of critical questions around the role of governance in shap-
ing or influencing regional adaptive capacities and outcomes. 
These include the scope which policy-makers have over key 
determinants of resilience, and what attributes of governance 
and policy help to enhance the capacity to manage resilience. 
It is to these questions that this paper now turns.

3  Framing Policy Action for Resilience

The growing literature on the management of complex adap-
tive human systems also provides a useful means of framing 
an understanding of policy action for resilience. A synthesis 
of available literature suggests that policy action for resil-
ience may be understood or framed in terms of three key 
dimensions: the institutions through which policy actors act, 
namely the modes and structures of governance; the types of 
policy intervention or action they take; and the horizons or 
timing of policy intervention. These issues and, more spe-
cifically, their implications for the management of regional 
economic resilience are now considered in turn.

3.1  Modes and Structures of Governance: How Policy 
Action Is Designed and Delivered

The literature on the resilience of complex adaptive human 
systems suggests that policy actors act as key agents of pur-
posive adaptation through institutions of governance which 
act as the setting through which their ideas have meaning, 
their discourse has communicative force and their collective 
actions make a difference (Moore/Westley 2011; Schmidt 
2011). Governance refers to the structures and processes by 
which people in places make decisions and share power and 
shape the conditions for ordered rule and collective action 
(Folke/Hahn/Olsson et al. 2005). As such, governance is 
more than simply the purview of the state through govern-
ment, but rather emerges from the interactions of many 
actors, including the private sector and not-for-profit organ-
isations. Moreover, it can be formally institutionalised or 
expressed through subtle norms of interaction, or even more 
indirectly through influencing the agendas and shaping the 
contexts within which actors contest decisions and obtain 
access to resources (Lebel/Anderies/Campbell et al. 2006).

Crucially, this literature emphasises that institutions of 
governance are inherently embedded within their systems 
such that they co-evolve with all other agents and with 

2013). This is because human agents have innate capaci-
ties to imagine, anticipate and respond to change, as well as 
the ability to take pro-active, intentional action to build up 
their capacities to be resilient through, for example, social 
learning (e.g. Magis 2010; Berkes/Ross 2013). This human 
agency may function through both individual and collective 
forms and at multiple scales including the household, com-
munity, region and country level (Davidson 2010; Skerratt 
2013). Understanding the scope for policy action for resil-
ience at the regional level thus demands an understanding 
of how, in the messy complexity of real world economies, 
human agency is drawn into combined influence and medi-
ated through forms of collective agency or governance. 
Governance refers to network-based modes of collec-
tive action which embrace a range of organised state and 
quasi-state actors and institutions (Pierre 2000; Benz/Fürst 
2002). Cowell (2013: 213) suggests that these bodies play 
an important role in developing purposive policy action to 
improve “the chance for a healthy region in the long run”.

The burgeoning literature on regional governance and 
policy coupled with the emerging insights from the evolu-
tionary literature on resilience, usefully warns of the dan-
gers of overstating and indeed oversimplying the capacities 
of regional policy-makers to act effectively in this way. 
Human agency generally has its limits. Whilst humans 
can anticipate change and use social, political and cultural 
means to influence resilience, control is at best partial and 
outcomes typically uncertain (Goldstein 2009). Capacities 
that assist the development of resilience vary between indi-
viduals and groups of people, and are unevenly distributed 
spatially (Berkes/Ross 2013). Wilson (2012) reminds us 
that resilience itself is multi-scalar with shocks emanating 
from different scales and played out with different effects at 
regional and local levels. Furthermore, regional governance 
increasingly acts within ever more complex multi-level gov-
ernance contexts, where there may be significant hard (i.e. 
resource and power) constraints upon regional governance 
(Uyarra/Flanagan 2010). The capacities of governance bod-
ies are thus likely to be highly contingent upon their avail-
able stocks of resources and their capacity to mobilise and 
deploy them effectively (Skerratt 2013).

Finally, embracing the contingencies of human agency 
also requires that attention be paid to the normative and 
political dimensions of resilience. Human agency may be 
translated into different agendas for action by the agents 
within complex social systems and their particular cultures 
(see Skerratt 2013). These different agendas are likely to 
be shaped by the unique political, economic and social 
contingencies of context to ensure that resilience is always 
likely to be subject to normative and political debate. Resil-
ient outcomes (such as persistent poverty cycles) may not 
always be desirable, for example, whilst non-resilient out-
comes (such as lower growth rates) may be, depending 



97Building Resilient Regions: Complex Adaptive Systems and the Role of Policy Intervention

roles of the agents in their agencies. Internal structures were 
regularly re-organised, assumptions challenged, and new 
and diverse ideas and information accommodated.

This represents a considerable challenge to the mechani-
cal and linear approach to place making and shaping which 
has tended to characterise approaches to regional economic 
policy. Taking this approach suggests that instead regions 
need to be understood as an interconnected system and gov-
ernance actors need to strengthen policy networks, embrace 
knowledge and learning from all sources in society, and fos-
ter innovation through decreasing the rigidity of disciplin-
ary, organisational and social boundaries. Thus, whilst the 
state is highly likely to play a critical role in shaping the 
evolution of the economic landscape (e.g. Hodgson 2009) 
and thus a region’s economic resilience, it is likely to do this 
in a more maven-like role and, crucially, in collaboration 
with other actors (e.g. Morgan 2013, who characterises the 
state as animateur, innovator and procurer). This notion is 
beginning to take hold in some of the ‘grey’ literature around 
the economic resilience of cities and regions. Notably, in 
their work on local economic resilience McInroy/Longlands 
(2010) emphasise the importance of strong relationships 
between the public, private and social economy sectors, 
governance, institutions and environment, a strongly pro-
active and co-ordinating role by local institutions of gover-
nance which facilitates and brokers these key relationships, 
a symbiotic rather than parasitic balance between local and 
global activities and connections, and flexible governance 
structures which enable rather than constrain the formation 
of relationships and networks in an area. Understanding 
when and how these ideals can be realised in practice of 
course requires more detailed empirical research.

A further key insight from studies examining the chal-
lenges of planning and managing amidst ongoing dynamic 
change concerns the merits of polycentric governance or 
systems in which “political authority is dispersed to sepa-
rately constituted bodies with overlapping jurisdictions 
that do not stand in hierarchical relationship to each other” 
(Skelcher 2005: 89). Traditionally, polycentric governance 
has been asserted in relation to normative arguments around 
the self-governing capacities and skills of local com-
munities (Ostrom/Tiebout/Warren 1961). More recently, 
polycentricity has been presented as desirable in terms of 
institutional diversity and the advantages it proffers when 
complex and uncertain problems need to be addressed 
(Ostrom 2005). Thus, polycentric governance systems are 
deemed to be better equipped to foster resilience for a num-
ber of reasons. Firstly, issues with different geographical 
scopes can be managed at different spatial scales. Secondly, 
their high degree of overlap and redundancy makes them 
less vulnerable if one institution or approach fails. Finally, 
the large number of institutional entities promotes experi-
mentation with new approaches and maximises opportuni-

the environment, all of which are constantly adapting and 
changing (Berkes/Colding/Folke 2003). Policy interven-
tion is thus internal to the system and constitutes one of 
its component parts, and is not external to it. It thus cannot 
be studied or developed in isolation but has to be under-
stood in relation to its connections with the other parts of 
the system—firms, the labour force, consumers, advocacy 
groups—and with the wider environment. As such, policy-
makers do not control the system or all the factors shap-
ing resilience, but rather can help manage and support the 
development of appropriate capacities for self-organisation 
and adaptation (Folke 2006).

This means that just as important as the discrete actions 
of policy-makers themselves is how and in what ways their 
actions relate to, impact upon and include other agents in 
the system and the environment as a whole. In other words, 
the networked nature of governance and policy is critical in 
resilience. Complex adaptive systems consist of a network 
of component agents constantly mutually affecting each 
other. Any particular agent can have a link to other agents, 
which in turn link to others through lines of communica-
tion, common tasks, market agreements, or other relation-
ships. This networked system thrives when there is space 
for experimental evolution, in which new ideas emerge and 
technology is constantly refined. An open network of con-
nections between agents can help create the conditions for 
knowledge to be generated and fed through into policy deci-
sions and more widespread behaviours and actions. Insti-
tutions of governance act as a unique connector inasmuch 
as in human systems they provide collective agency and 
scope for more complex communication and co-operation 
between multiple agents (Moore/Westley 2011).

Booher and Innes’s study of California’s water planning 
and management process, known as CALFED (Booher/
Innes 2010), provides an interesting practical example of 
complex adaptive networked governance of environmen-
tal resources. CALFED began in 1994 as a self-organising 
entity without federal or state legislative structure to address 
the stalemate in decision-making on California’s water 
policy. It never assumed a fixed form or definite boundary 
around its tables of participants, but began as a rudimentary 
interagency agreement among state and federal agencies. 
Over a 10-year period it developed a number of governance 
interventions to deal with its complex challenges includ-
ing a distributed network structure (engaging hundreds of 
agents in a ‘patchwork’ hierarchy), collaborative heuristics 
of agent interactions, a nonlinear planning method (whereby 
some actions were implemented ahead of the completion of 
plans), and a self-organising system behaviour. In terms of 
the latter, participants thus defined and refined their task and 
scope along the way, adapting to new problems and infor-
mation. Crucially, the system’s behaviour was determined 
by their interactions and relationships not by the formal 



98 G. Bristow, A. Healy

tions in setting and shaping these wider institutional agendas 
for resilience is fundamental, but remains underexplored.

A clear and convincing vision, comprehensive narrative 
and strong social links and trust with other stakeholders, 
is critical in mobilising the self-organisation, learning and 
capacity-building processes deemed so critical to the gov-
ernance of complex adaptive systems (Berkes/Ross 2013). 
Individual and collective actors within social systems need 
to engage with the subjective and symbolic meanings of 
resilience in order to decide the specifics of what should 
be made resilient to which disturbances, what the desired 
outcomes are, and whose resilience should have priority. 
Planners may play a particularly important role here in 
designing the collaborative settings in which narrative con-
struction can take place (Goldstein/Taufen Wessels/Lejano 
et al. 2013). Clearly, however, resilience agendas may dif-
fer between ‘conservative’ and ‘radical’—the former view-
ing interventions as enabling or promoting a return to the 
state that existed before the shock; the latter in contrast see-
ing resilience as a rejection of the status quo and a need 
to adapt or transform the system in a more radical manner 
(Raco/Street 2012). Achieving the requisite collaboration 
and innovation in governance requires bold and transforma-
tional leadership which can overcome contradiction, engage 
the opinions and values of a critical mass of people and 
forge new alliances between knowledge and action (Folke/
Hahn/Olsson et al. 2005).

Berkes/Colding/Folke (2003) highlight the importance of 
strategies for fostering learning, innovation and improved 
communication as being critical to the active development 
of resilience in complex adaptive human systems (see also 
Magis 2010). Each agent in a complex system is continu-
ally searching for new ways of adapting to the environment. 
Thus knowledge about the environment and how it is chang-
ing is the key to self-organisation and the ability of agents 
to understand how and in what ways they need to adapt in 
order to survive. What particularly distinguishes economic 
and human systems from biological ones, is the role played 
by learning, adaptive management and the deliberate acqui-
sition of knowledge. Humans have a unique capacity to 
manipulate, store and exchange information through com-
plex forms of co-operation and communication. Communi-
cation allows people and places to document and learn from 
experience, to ask for help from external relations, and to 
motivate popular action for change. In governance terms, 
this means that opening management systems to gain infor-
mation and perspectives from multiple sources is a key.

In relation to subnational policy intervention for eco-
nomic resilience, the imperative for adaptive governance 
and policy suggests a critical role for subnational actors in 
terms of mobilising knowledge of the economic environ-
ment, how it is changing, its territorial specificities and 
assessing the particular vulnerabilities, risks and oppor-

ties for mutual learning. However, the vertical links of such 
arrangements can on occasions stifle adaptive governance 
as, for example, in cases where national regulations limit 
localised scope for informal or collaborative action (Folke/
Hahn/Olsson et al. 2005).

In relation to economic resilience, there is some empiri-
cal evidence to suggest that there is a positive correlation 
between diverse, polycentric governance and regional eco-
nomic performance (Brookings Institution/London School 
of Economics/Deutsche Bank Research 2010), although 
more research on the significance of particular structures in 
terms of the distribution of power and resources between 
nested tiers of governance is needed. Furthermore, whilst 
some authors have promoted the value of diverse and mod-
ular approaches to policy-making (e.g. Beinhocker 2007; 
Bristow 2010), there is limited empirical evidence to date 
on the development of such approaches in practice.

Finally, complex adaptive systems literatures also point to 
important requirements for the management and leadership 
functions of governance. In an environment which is more 
unstable, accelerative and unpredictable, no single actor or 
institution of governance is in control or capable of influenc-
ing system dynamics alone. Thus the optimal leadership role 
is one of mediator and manager, one which enables inter-
actions between agents, facilitates joint learning and leads 
decision-making on actions (Booher/Innes 2010).

3.2  Types of Policy Intervention

Complex adaptive systems literatures also provide significant 
insights into the importance of what types of public policy 
intervention, or instruments, can facilitate economic resil-
ience. In broad terms, a triad of activities have been identi-
fied as important, namely a clear vision, appropriate reactive 
interventions, as well as suitable prospective actions.

The first of these concerns the provision of a vision and 
direction for the development of resilience—ostensibly a 
resilience agenda or ‘ethos’ (McManus/Seville/Brunsdon 
et al. 2007). Institutions of government are in a particularly 
important position here since their power and resources 
imbue them with significant capacity to influence and pro-
vide leadership of resilience agendas and shape the contexts 
within which individual and collective actors make deci-
sions and access resources. As a number of authors observe, 
social systems are structured not only by rules, position and 
resources but also by meaning and by the entire network of 
communicating individuals and organisations at different 
levels of interaction (Folke/Hahn/Olsson et al. 2005; Gold-
stein/Taufen Wessells/Lejano et al. 2013). As such, changing 
perceptions of the environment or of development chal-
lenges can change human behaviour on a fairly large scale 
without the social dynamics and political behaviour involved 
in making and changing rules. The role of policy interven-



99Building Resilient Regions: Complex Adaptive Systems and the Role of Policy Intervention

draw attention to the challenges for industrial policy in 
developing resilience in mature industrial districts. In par-
ticular, their study highlights the need for industrial policy to 
be co-ordinated, particularly in drawing links between firms 
and institutions. In the North Staffordshire case, industrial 
policy has generally tended to be ad-hoc and limited, often 
reacting to events rather than anticipating them. Menzel/For-
nahl (2007) consider that adapting policies at various stages 
of the cluster’s life cycle—such as through selective (small 
firm) start-up policies—might be useful to militate against 
decline and facilitate the emergence of new development 
paths. Others have pointed to the importance of ‘platform’ 
policies which facilitate innovation through making and sup-
porting unusual (cross-sectional) connections and the gener-
ation of new ideas and novelty (Uyarra 2010; Cooke 2012).

3.3  Horizons for Intervention

As well as understanding what sub-national policy-makers 
can do to build resilience, it is also important to understand 
when they can do it. Complex adaptive systems thinking 
emphasises the dynamic nature of development trajecto-
ries and policy responses and resilience is concerned with 
multiscale temporal processes of change. Policies for resil-
ience thus need to be sensitive to the various principles of 
complexity such as feedback, nonlinearity, unpredictabil-
ity, renewal cycles, memory in the system, and the signifi-
cance of windows of opportunity during which innovative 
changes can be made to the system (Berkes/Ross 2013). In 
particular, complex system thinking focuses attention in 
particular not on why change happens, but instead on how 
revealed outcomes emerge. Change is thus the constant and 
to be expected, if not necessarily accurately predicted, such 
that the focus for policy needs to be on “responsive adap-
tation” rather than “predictive avoidance” (Hartzog 2005: 
22). Folke (2006: 263) asserts that the implication for policy 
is profound, requiring a shift away from policies based on 
steady-state thinking and the design of policies that stimu-
late adaptive responses to change in the short- and long-
term. In short, what is required is a readiness to accept 
change, and the development of policies that work with the 
grain of evolutionary trajectories that were becoming clear 
before shocks and crises, as well as clear plans for alterna-
tive futures or scenarios (see, for example, Wrigley/Dolega 
2011; Berkes/Ross 2013).

Achieving this new way of framing policy-making may 
be easier said than done of course. Levin/Barrett/Aniyar et 
al. (1998: 228) highlight the challenges in managing resil-
ience in complex systems, observing that “policy should be 
concerned with more than the immediate consequences of 
incremental actions. It should recognize the potential for 
an accumulation of small actions, each on their own per-
haps quite harmless, to destabilize important natural and 

tunities of its territory in relation to these changes. This 
depends upon highly networked information and manage-
ment systems capable of understanding specific territorial 
path dependencies and likely development trajectories or 
the region’s economic ‘DNA’. In this instance, the policy 
application of resilience is thus a search for qualities and 
attributes of the territory which make it adaptable and able 
to thrive on change (Dawley/Pike/Tomaney 2010; McIn-
roy/Longlands 2010). In essence, a resilience perspective 
frames policy thinking away from off the shelf blueprints to 
more bespoke strategies with a defined cognisance of con-
text and place (Shaw 2012).

Dawley/Pike/Tomaney (2010: 11 f.) point to a number of 
implications for local and regional development strategies. 
Political leadership is clearly of paramount importance at 
the time of a disruption or crisis. However, there also needs 
to be intelligent institutional leadership in framing and artic-
ulating the nature of the event or crisis and constructing a 
discursive narrative of strategic adaptation or adaptability to 
enrol key local and regional actors.

A second key policy area for resilience embraces inter-
ventions which enable the capacities of different actors in the 
system to react to economic shocks and to respond and adapt 
to change. These interventions may incorporate structural 
adjustment mechanisms, such as automatic fiscal stabilis-
ers, or may involve purposive actions on the part of national, 
or sub-national, policy-makers. It is an area of policy that 
is well-studied in the field of local economic development. 
Activities can include policies which provide support to 
adversely affected firms, such as in the form of temporary 
wage subsidies in some German Länder, or investments in 
rapid redeployment initiatives to support workers’ adapt-
ability to changing labour market conditions (e.g. the PRO-
ACT initiative introduced by the Welsh Government in 
2008 which provided part-funding for businesses that had 
introduced short-term working for employees, with a view 
to helping them retain skilled workers and their specific on-
the-job knowledge), or providing funds to support individual 
re-training or skill enhancement. In some cases a number of 
interventions can be combined to create an ‘Economic Resil-
ience Package’ to “alleviate the worst effects of the reces-
sion” (Gateshead Council 2009: 7). However, much of this 
literature considers the role of public policy intervention as 
a counter-cyclical public expenditure stimulus. Rather less 
attention has been granted to the potential for public policy 
intervention in the face of public sector austerity.

In some instances, economic resilience may be enhanced 
through prospective actions that seek to strengthen economic 
structures and systems, such as by fostering system diversity 
and encouraging modularity so that system shocks can be 
contained (Berkes/Colding/Folke 2003). For example, in a 
study of the ceramics industrial district in North Stafford-
shire in the UK, Hervas-Oliver/Jackson/Tomlinson (2011) 



100 G. Bristow, A. Healy

doing so, the agenda which has been adopted as a form of 
‘resilience narrative’ becomes particularly important, for it 
is this agenda which sets the tone of the policy interven-
tions to follow. This necessarily implies the development of 
a long-term perspective for policy-making and an emphasis 
upon investing in preparing for the future. Whether such a 
perspective fits easily with shorter-term political objectives 
and cycles constitutes a potentially significant challenge.

4  Conclusions

This paper has sought to provide a stronger conceptual basis 
for understanding the role and scope for policy intervention 
in the development of resilient regional economies. In so 
doing, it has presented a complex adaptive systems perspec-
tive on regional economic resilience and highlighted the role 
of human agency, particularly in collective forms of gover-
nance, in shaping the evolutionary trajectories of regional 
economies. It has also sought to identify the critical attributes 
of governance and policy likely to help to build and enhance 
resilience. In summary, a number of conclusions relating to 
the challenge of policy-making for resilience may be drawn.

First and foremost, research on adaptive governance of 
complex social systems highlights that building resilience in 
such systems is a complex and challenging task and one that 
is not easily subject to planning and control by a single, cen-
tral organisation such as a government body. For regional 
and local governments seeking to build territorial resilience 
to economic shocks, the clear implication is that they need 
to work collaboratively with a range of other actors and thus 
develop responses as part of a strategically co-ordinated, yet 
fluid network of governance. Notwithstanding this, govern-
ment bodies remain good candidates for articulating req-
uisite resilience agendas and developing the management, 
brokering and leadership necessary for effective self-organ-
isation (Folke/Hahn/Olsson et al. 2005).

Regional and local governments may be particularly 
well-placed to develop these roles given their greater under-
standing of territorial specificities and the importance of 
place-based ‘capitals’ or resources in building resilience 
(Bristow/Healy 2013). However, they may also be faced 
with limited capacities in terms of legislative and/or fiscal 
resources. The development of effective and co-ordinated 
polycentricity in governance is thus critical and whilst there 
is some empirical evidence to suggest that there is a posi-
tive correlation between diverse, polycentric governance 
and regional economic performance (Brookings Institution/
London School of Economics/Deutsche Bank Research 
2010), more research is needed to understand why this is, 
how it might vary in different national contexts and how 
appropriate degrees of cross-level and cross-scale co-ordi-
nation and support can be achieved in practice.

social systems”. They go on to state that “the difficulty is 
that, while we can predict with reasonable confidence the 
immediate consequences of an incremental action, we can-
not predict the consequences of an entire sequence of actions 
without understanding the systems potentially being affected 
by them” Levin/Barrett/Aniyar et al. (1998: 228). Change is 
thus a constant process of action, reaction and interpretation, 
with policy-makers just one actor within a complex interplay 
of agents. Developing an acute sensitivity to system dynam-
ics is all the more challenging where institutional structures 
have ossified or become locked-in to particular development 
trajectories, or where strategies have been tied into rigid 
planning horizons which are difficult to break.

One way of distinguishing the different horizons for 
policy intervention is according to when they occur rela-
tive to the shock or stimulus. First there is the immediate 
reaction to a crisis. These may be short term, temporary 
measures which seek to mitigate the emerging effects of the 
crisis. The wage subsidies referred to earlier may be one 
example of such an approach for economies. These reac-
tive policy interventions help firms, or households, to com-
bat the immediate impact of an economic shock and seek 
to prevent negative short-term responses by these agents, 
which, in aggregate, might have more detrimental long-
term impacts. Such interventions may help to ensure that an 
economy does not become locked-in to a longer-term eco-
nomic decline and so facilitates a rapid recovery from the 
initial economic downturn.

As the full effects and magnitude of the shock becomes 
apparent over time, policy-makers may then start to develop 
and deploy additional types of intervention in response 
to the crisis. This may be particularly pertinent where an 
economic shock, for example, proved too significant for 
the reactive measures immediately available to counter-
act. This more responsive mode can take many forms and 
involve both interventions that seek to respond to the effects 
of the shock itself, such as through stimulating increases in 
demand, and interventions that are aimed at a longer-term 
transformation of the economy (the reorientation which 
Martin (2012) speaks of). Such actions might signal both an 
attempt to formulate routes by which the territory can exit 
from its post-crisis circumstances and an attempt to better 
prepare for the possibilities of future economic shocks.

In learning from the lessons of the past crisis, policy-
makers may also begin to consider a range of anticipatory 
actions. These embrace actions which are designed to build 
a stronger understanding of system dynamics, its existing 
strengths and vulnerabilities to shocks—as part of a desire 
to be better prepared for potential shocks in the future. These 
may consist of seeking to transform the system to build bet-
ter resilience in the future and of actions to monitor the 
particularities of the system in order to track performance, 
identify strengths and potential risks and vulnerabilities. In 



101Building Resilient Regions: Complex Adaptive Systems and the Role of Policy Intervention

to react quickly to economic crises is important and as such 
these need to be built in advance so that they can be mobil-
ised as and when required. More considered and bespoke 
responses can be developed over time as the nature and 
effects of the crises are understood, whilst a continuous pro-
cess of forecasting, assessment of vulnerabilities and risks 
is critical in developing the knowledge required to develop 
longer-term strategic imperatives for resilience. How such 
responses can be designed and delivered in practice repre-
sents a considerable challenge. This is particularly the case 
where institutional cultures or resource constraints work to 
inhibit agility in governance, policy and planning. This is a 
challenge worthy of further empirical research.

Acknowledgements The research upon which this paper is based was 
funded by ESPON under its programme ‘Economic Crises: Resilience 
of Regions’. The authors gratefully acknowledge this support.

Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any 
noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, 
provided the original author(s) and the source are credited.

References

Beinhocker, E.D. (2007): The Origin of Wealth: Evolution, Complex-
ity, and the Radical Remaking of Economics. Boston.

Benz, A.; Fürst, D. (2002): Policy learning in regional networks. In: 
European Urban and Regional Studies 9 (1), 21–35.

Berkes, F.; Colding, J.; Folke, C. (2003): Navigating social-ecolog-
ical systems: building resilience for complexity and change. 
Cambridge.

Berkes, F.; Ross, H. (2013): Community resilience: toward an inte-
grated approach. In: Society and Natural Resources 26 (1), 5–20.

Booher, D.E.; Innes, J.E. (2010): Governance for resilience: CALFED 
as a complex adaptive network for resource management. In: Ecol-
ogy and Society 15 (3), 35.

Bristow, G. (2010): Resilient Regions: Re-‘place’ing regional com-
petitiveness. In: Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and 
Society 3 (1), 153–167.

Bristow, G.; Healy, A. (2013): Regional Resilience: an Agency Perspec-
tive. In: Regional Studies. DOI: 10.1080/00343404.2013.854879.

Brookings Institution; London School of Economics; Deutsche Bank 
Research (2010): Global Metro Monitor: The Path to Economic 
Recovery. Washington, D.C., London.

Carpenter, S.; Walker, B.; Anderies, J.M.; Abel, N. (2001): From meta-
phor to measurement: resilience of what to what? In: Ecosystems 
4 (8), 765–781.

Christopherson, S.; Michie, J.; Tyler, P. (2010): Regional resilience: 
theoretical and empirical perspectives. In: Cambridge Journal of 
Regions, Economy and Society 3 (1), 3–10.

Cooke, P. (2012): Complex Adaptive Innovation Systems: Relatedness 
and Transversality in the Evolving Region (Regions and Cities). 
London.

Cowell, M.M. (2013): Bounce back or move on: regional resilience 
and economic development planning. In: Cities 30 (1), 212–222.

Davidson, D.J. (2010): The applicability of the concept of resilience to 
social systems: some sources of optimism and nagging doubts. In: 
Society and Natural Resources 23 (12), 1135–1149.

Second, developing appropriate policies for resilience 
demands the development of more sophisticated and agile 
governance networks. The resilience challenge requires 
complex and networked policy responses that embrace 
diverse ideas, innovations and institutions. The CALFED 
example discussed in the paper demonstrates how more fluid 
and flexible forms of collaborative governance are required 
to respond to the complex and accelerating pace of environ-
mental change. It is reasonable to argue that this applies in 
equal measure to regional economies which are increasingly 
exposed to highly pernicious winds of global economic 
change, financial crises and restructuring. Understanding the 
various interactions and connections in territorial economies 
is thus critical to effective policy design, as is combining 
diverse agents and groups in ways to create opportunities 
for new interactions and learning (see McInroy/Longlands 
2010; Graugaard 2012). This is heavily dependent upon 
the existence or creation of trust. As Levin/Barrett/Ani-
yar et al. (1998: 232) observe, “reciprocal altruism is an 
important stabilizing force, and its evolution and mainte-
nance are enhanced by the local nature of interactions”. In 
other words, there are strong opportunities for developing 
the requisite interactions and relationships at sub-national 
level in place-based interventions. However, it is relatively 
straightforward to state the importance of developing open, 
networked and highly participatory forms of governance in 
regional economies. It is rather more challenging to create 
them in practice, particularly in an era of fiscal austerity and 
constraint, so that much more empirical work is required to 
find examples of such networks and understand how they 
succeed in mobilising the power of others.

Third and finally, a complex adaptive systems perspec-
tive suggests that to develop resilience demands a policy 
approach which is sensitive to the various principles of 
complexity, notably nonlinearity, unpredictability, the 
importance of feedback and learning. This represents a con-
siderable challenge to traditionally linear forms of policy-
making for economic development in regions and requires 
policy interventions which are based upon strong monitoring 
and evaluation of system dynamics and, in particular, of the 
behaviour and choices of people and organisations in relation 
to economic shocks and change. This requires the develop-
ment of strong data management systems, speedy transfers 
of knowledge and learning between key organisations, and 
flexible institutions (Folke/Hahn/Olsson et al. 2005: 443). 
It also requires a diversity of approaches, modular thinking 
and the development of policy buffers or contingencies, all 
of which are highly demanding in terms of human, financial 
and organisational capital—resources which are also likely 
to be highly stretched where crises are also accompanied by 
fiscal constraints. Resilience also demands that attention be 
paid to the temporal nature of development trajectories, cri-
ses and appropriate policy responses. Having the capacities 



102 G. Bristow, A. Healy

Martin, R. (2012): Regional economic resilience, hysteresis and reces-
sionary shocks. In: Journal of Economic Geography 12 (1), 1–32.

Martin, R.; Sunley, P. (2007): Complexity Thinking and Evolutionary 
Economic Geography. In: Journal of Economic Geography 7 (5), 
573–601.

McInroy, N.; Longlands, S. (2010): Productive Local Economies: Cre-
ating Resilient Places. CLES—Centre for Local Economic Strate-
gies. Manchester.

McManus, S.; Seville, E.; Brunsdon, D.; Vargo, J. (2007): Resilience 
Management. A Framework for Assessing and Improving the Re-
silience of Organisations. Christchurch, New Zealand.

Menzel, M.-P.; Fornahl, D. (2007): Cluster Life Cycles—Dimensions 
and Rationales of Cluster Development. Jena. = Jena Economic 
Research Papers 2007–076.

Moore, M.-L.; Westley, F. (2011): Surmountable Chasms: Networks 
and Social Innovation for Resilient Systems. In: Ecology and So-
ciety 16 (1), 5.

Morgan, K. (2013): Path dependence and the state: the politics of 
novelty in old industrial regions. In: Cooke, P. (ed.): Re-framing 
Regional Development: Evolution, Innovation and Transition. 
London, 318–340.

Ostrom, E. (2005): Understanding Institutional Diversity. Princeton, 
New Jersey.

Ostrom, V.; Tiebout, C.M.; Warren, R. (1961): The organization of 
government in metropolitan areas. A theoretical inquiry. In: Amer-
ican Political Science Review 55 (4), 831–842.

Pendall, R.; Foster, K.A.; Cowell, M. (2010): Resilience and regions: 
building understanding of the metaphor. In: Cambridge Journal of 
Regions, Economy and Society 3 (1), 71–84.

Pierre, J. (ed.) (2000): Debating Governance: Authority, Steering, and 
Democracy. Oxford.

Pike, A.; Dawley, S.; Tomaney, J. (2010): Resilience, adaptation and 
adaptability. In: Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and So-
ciety 3 (1), 59–70.

Raco, M.; Street, E. (2012): Resilience Planning, Economic Change 
and the Politics of Post-Recession Development in London and 
Hong Kong. In: Urban Studies 49 (5), 1065–1087.

Shaw, K. (2012): ‘Reframing’ Resilience: Challenges for Planning 
Theory and Practice. In: Planning Theory and Practice 13 (2), 
308–312.

Schmidt, V.A. (2011): Speaking of change: why discourse is key to 
the dynamics of policy transformation. In: Critical Policy Studies 
5 (2), 106–126.

Skelcher, C. (2005): Jurisdictional integrity, polycentrism, and the de-
sign of democratic governance. In: Governance 18 (1), 89–110.

Skerratt, S. (2013): Enhancing the analysis of rural community resil-
ience: evidence from community land ownership. In: Journal of 
Rural Studies 31, 36–46.

Simmie, J.; Martin, R.L. (2010): The economic resilience of regions: 
towards an evolutionary approach. In: Cambridge Journal of Re-
gions, Economy and Society 3 (1), 27–43.

Uyarra, E. (2010): What is evolutionary about ‘regional systems of 
innovation’? Implications for regional policy. In: Journal of Evo-
lutionary Economics 20 (1), 115–137.

Uyarra, E.; Flanagan, K. (2010): From regional systems of innovation 
to regions as innovation policy spaces. In: Environment and Plan-
ning C 28 (4), 681–695.

Walker, B.; Holling, C.; Carpenter, S.; Kinzig, A. (2004): Resilience, 
adaptability and transformability in social-ecological systems. In: 
Ecology and Society 9 (2), 5.

Wilson, G.A. (2012): Community Resilience and Environmental Tran-
sitions. London.

Wrigley, N.; Dolega, L. (2011): Resilience, fragility, and adaptation: 
new evidence on the performance of UK high streets during global 
economic crisis and its policy implications. In: Environment and 
Planning A 43 (10), 2337–2363.

Dawley, S.; Pike, A.; Tomaney, J. (2010): Towards the resilient re-
gion?: Policy activism and peripheral region development. New-
castle. = SERC Discussion Paper 53.

Folke, C. (2006): Resilience: the emergence of a perspective for social-
ecological systems analyses. In: Global Environmental Change 16 
(3), 253–267.

Folke, C.; Hahn, T.; Olsson, P.; Norberg, J. (2005): Adaptive gover-
nance of social-ecological systems. In: Annual Review of Envi-
ronment and Resources 30, 441–473.

Gateshead Council (2009): Ten Point Plan for Economic Resilience. 
Gateshead.

Goldstein, B.E. (2009): Resilience to surprises through communica-
tive planning. In: Ecology and Society 14 (2), 33.

Goldstein, B.E.; Taufen Wessells, A.; Lejano, R.; Butler, W. 
(2013): Narrating resilience: transforming urban systems 
through collaborative storytelling. In: Urban Studies. DOI: 
10.1177/0042098013505653 50.

Graugaard, J.D. (2012): A tool for building community resilience? 
A case study of the Lewes Pound. In: Local Environment 17 (2), 
243–260.

Hartzog, P.B. (2005): Panarchy: Governance in the Network Age. 
https://www.academia.edu/210378/Panarchy_Governance_in_
the_Network_Age (29.01.2014).

Hassink, R. (2010): Regional resilience: a promising concept to ex-
plain differences in regional economic adaptability? In: Cam-
bridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society 3 (1), 45–58.

Hervas-Oliver, J.-L.; Jackson, I.; Tomlinson, P.R. (2011): ‘May the 
ovens never grow cold’: regional resilience and industrial policy in 
the North Staffordshire ceramics industrial district—with lessons 
from Sassoulo and Castellon. In: Policy Studies 32 (4), 377–395.

Hill, E.; St. Clair, T.; Wial, H.; Wolman, H.; Atkins, P.; Blumenthal, P.; 
Ficenec, S.; Friedhoff, A. (2011): Economic shocks and regional 
economic resilience. Berkeley. = Working Paper 2011–13, Build-
ing Resilient Regions: Institute of Governmental Studies, Univer-
sity of California, Berkeley.

Hodgson, G.M. (2009): Agency, Institutions, and Darwinism in Evo-
lutionary Economic Geography. In: Economic Geography 85 (2), 
167–179.

Holland, J.H. (1992): Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems: An 
Introductory Analysis with Applications to Biology, Control and 
Artificial Intelligence. Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Holling, C.S. (1996): Engineering resilience versus ecological resil-
ience. In: Schulze, P.C. (ed.): Engineering within Ecological Con-
straints. Washington D.C., 31–44.

Lang, T. (2011): Urban resilience and new institutional theory—a 
happy couple for urban and regional studies? In: Müller, B. (ed.): 
Urban Regional Resilience: How Do Cities and Regions Deal with 
Change? Berlin, 15–22. = German Annual of Spatial Research and 
Policy 2010.

Lebel, L.; Anderies, J.M.; Campbell, B.; Folke, C.; Hatfield-Dodds, S.; 
Hughes, T.P.; Wilson, J. (2006): Governance and the capacity to 
manage resilience in regional social-ecological systems. In: Ecol-
ogy and Society 11 (1), 19.

Levin, S.A.; Barrett, S.; Aniyar, S.; Baumol, W.; Bliss, C.; Bolin, B.; 
Dasgupta, P.; Ehrlich, P.; Folke, C.; Gren, I.-M.; Holling, C.S.; 
Jansson, A.; Jansson, B.-O.; Maler, K.-G.; Martin, D.; Perrings, 
C.; Sheshinksi, E. (1998): Resilience in natural and socioeconom-
ic systems. In: Environment and Development Economics 3 (2), 
221–262.

MacKinnon, D.; Cumbers, A.; Pike, A.; Birch, K.; McMaster, R. 
(2009): Evolution in Economic Geography: Institutions, Politi-
cal Economy, and Adaptation. In: Economic Geography 85 (2), 
129–150.

Magis, K. (2010): Community resilience: an indicator of social sus-
tainability. In: Society and Natural Resources 23 (5), 401–416.

https://www.academia.edu/210378/Panarchy_Governance_in_the_Network_Age
https://www.academia.edu/210378/Panarchy_Governance_in_the_Network_Age

	﻿Building Resilient Regions: Complex Adaptive Systems and the Role of Policy Intervention
	﻿Abstract
	﻿Zusammenfassung
	﻿1﻿ ﻿﻿﻿Introduction
	﻿2﻿ ﻿﻿﻿Regional Economic Resilience: An Adaptive Concept
	﻿3﻿ ﻿﻿﻿Framing Policy Action for Resilience
	﻿3.1﻿ ﻿﻿﻿Modes and Structures of Governance: How Policy Action Is Designed and Delivered
	﻿3.2﻿ ﻿﻿﻿Types of Policy Intervention
	﻿3.3﻿ ﻿﻿﻿Horizons for Intervention

	﻿4﻿ ﻿﻿﻿Conclusions
	﻿References