rz_dg-mouton


ZfTW 2017; 9(1): 65-86 

Christian Noack* 
The Magnitostroi of Health: Sochi and the 
Transformation of the Caucasian Black Sea 
Coast as a Model for Regional Development 
in the Soviet Union and the Russian 
Federation 
DOI 10.1515/tw-2017-0004 

Abstract: In the run-up to the Sochi Winter Olympics in 2014, the Russian lead-
ership repeatedly declared the games to be exemplary for future regional devel-
opment projects within the country. Treating Sochi as a model case for regional 
development has a long pre-history, going back to the period of ‘high Stalin-
ism’. Discussing the consecutive development plans for Sochi since the 1930s, 
this article suggests that in the case of Sochi, Moscow’s methods of octroying 
centrally planned grandiose schemes with massive short-term investment 
‘against all odds’ displayed a high degree of consistency over time. Stalin’s 
plans to create a ‘world-class’ resort, the ambitious plans to accommodate a 
genuine Soviet mass tourism in the 1960s and 70s in ‘Great Sochi’ as well as the 
preparation of the 2014 Olympics habitually produced significant discrepancies 
between the aspired aims of Soviet development and its socio-economic and 
ecologic consequences in the region. 

Keywords: Black Sea, Caucasus, Central Planning, Ecology, Five-Year Plans, 
Great Sochi, Health resort, Mass tourism, Olympic games, Perestroika, 
recreation, regional development, Sanatoria, Social tourism, Soviet Union, 
Stalinism, Urban Planning  

The 2014 Sochi Winter Olympics entered history as the biggest and most expen-
sive ever, showcasing contemporary Russia’s modernity and openness. Accord-
ing to Western estimates, the games cost approximately 50 billion US dollars, 
more than five time the sum initially planned. The lion’s share had to come from 
the Russian Federations state budget (Müller, 2015, pp. 191). Whom did Vladimir 
Putin intend to impress? If it was a global audience, then the rampant corrup-

|| 
*Corresponding author: Christian Noack, University of Amsterdam, East European Studies,
Kloveniersburgwal 48, NL 1012 CX Amsterdam, c.u.noack@uva.nl

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:25



66 | Christian Noack  

 

tion afflicting the mega project from the beginning, and its obvious neglect of 
environmental standards and human rights in the process of realisation ren-
dered international perception increasingly sceptical. Russia’s annexation of 
the Crimea and its interference in the Donbas immediately after the games 
closed seem to indicate that Putin could not have cared less. 

The Sochi Olympics, then, were also meant to be awe-inspiring for a domes-
tic audience, “fomenting solidarity and place-based loyalty through spectacle” 
(Alekseyeva, 2014, p. 168). In this respect the games may have indeed been 
quite successful, eliciting pride in the fatherland and its leadership. True, an 
outspoken minority within Russia criticised the above-listed shortcomings, too, 
yet opinion polls demonstrated that a majority of Russia’s citizens expressed 
consistent support for the project (Alekseyeva, 2014, p. 161, quote 16). Besides 
raising patriotic feelings, the Olympics served the federal government, led nom-
inally by the ‘moderniser’ Medvedev in much of the preparatory period (2008–
2012), as a blueprint for large-scale regional development schemes. Again, crit-
ics have been quick to point out that the excessive spending on oversized sports 
facilities, like the skating rink, or gigantic infra-structural projects like the new 
Sochi Airport or the rail link to Krasnaia Poliana, constitute a rather dubious 
legacy for the future development of the Sochi region, the prime tourist destina-
tions in southern Russia (Alekseyeva, 2014, pp. 159, 161; Müller, 2014, p. 154; 
Müller, 2015, pp. 198, 203).  

In fact, the emergence and growth of the holiday destination ‘Great Sochi’ 
had followed a quite similar logic in terms of a top-down development imple-
mented by Moscow. My article argues that the creation of Sochi as the model 
Soviet health and holiday resort under Stalin’s auspices in the 1930s set a para-
digm for gigantic regional development projects in the realm of leisure and 
tourism. In this sense, the federal government’s approach to the Olympics pro-
ject, turning Sochi once again into the “largest construction site on Earth” (Mül-
ler, 2015, p. 191), followed a deeply entrenched logic.  

Russia’s Caucasian Black Sea coast had been relatively underdeveloped 
well into the Soviet period, while other destinations in the Empire, like the Cri-
mea and the Baltics had witnessed significant tourism in the wake of railway 
construction already during the second half of the nineteenth century. Sochi, 
the primary resort on the so-called ‘Russian Riviera’, emerged as a genuinely 
Soviet showcase project during the Second Five-Year Plan (1933–1937), intended 
to dwarf all existing resorts in the Soviet Union in terms of quality and quantity. 
Sochi was declared an udarnaia stroika, a prioritised “shock construction” site 
(Anonymous, 1934), along with Dnieprostroi Dam or the Moscow metro. Calling 
Sochi a “magnitostroi of health”, Pravda compared Sochi to one of the iconic 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:25



 The Magnitostroi of Health | 67 

 

industrial projects of the First Five-Year Plan, Magnitogorsk. This was a town 
built around a gigantic steel plant in the middle of nowhere. Launched around 
the time in which Stalin celebrated the advent of ‘Socialism’ in the USSR, the 
Second Five-Plan tended to prioritise industrial projects not as exclusively as 
the First. Still, the comparison with Magnitogorsk is quite remarkable, as Soviet 
thinking about modernisation and development was deeply rooted in nine-
teenth-century concepts of industrialisation and agricultural improvement. 
Until the late Soviet period, third-sector service industries including tourism 
were hardly seen as means of regional development and thus, as a rule, were 
not a priority for planners. 

In that sense, Sochi’s development is both paradigmatic and an exception 
to the rule. The article first analyses Stalin’s ‘invention’ of Soviet Sochi as a 
‘world class health resort’ and then traces the impact of the first grand design 
on the region and on later development strategies, from the creation of ‘Great 
Sochi’ in the 1960s to Putin’s Olympics project in the 2000s, with which the 
story comes full circle. 

1 The Setting  

As late as the 1870s, the Caucasian Black Sea coast south of the Caucasus re-
mained a contested borderland of the Russian empire, temporarily evacuated 
during wars against the Ottomans. Primarily strategic considerations led to 
Russian colonisation of the coastal region after the expulsion of indigenous 
peoples like the Cherkess. Up to WW I, the Empire resettled the area with retired 
soldiers and ethnic minorities from other parts of the empire, for example, Esto-
nians and Germans. The tsars also granted larger landholdings to high repre-
sentatives of their civil and military administration, some of whom built sump-
tuous summerhouses in the area. 

These colonisation efforts, however, suffered from the difficult climatic 
conditions, endemic malaria and poor connections with Russia across the Cau-
casus. Seasonal heavy rains, floods and landslides harassed the settlers. After 
the destruction of Cherkess orchards, the settlers struggled with setting up their 
own farms, fortresses, villages and towns. The narrow coastal plain, segmented 
by a large number of ravines, gullies and small streams, created significant 
obstacles for an agricultural exploitation that would have made the colonisation 
effort economically viable. The area remained dependent on the importation of 
food.  

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:25



68 | Christian Noack  

 

The influx of Armenian refugees from the Ottoman Empire after the pog-
roms of 1894–1896, 1909 and 1915–1916 brought some agricultural improvement 
in the shape of tea and extensive tobacco farming and left a significant imprint 
on the demographic situation. By 1926, Armenians amounted to about one third 
of the local population, whereas ethnic Russians accounted for only one quarter 
(Vershadskaia, 2006, p. 21).  

Access to the area remained difficult well into the twentieth century. Be-
sides one road from Novorossiisk constructed in 1892, the Sochi area could be 
reached by Black Sea navigation only. The lack of proper ports, however, ob-
structed sea travel and trade. Until the 1930s, passengers had to disembark on 
the roadstead and were brought to the shore with barges. Sochi was linked to 
the Russian railroad network only in 1923. Although some foreign observers 
praised the beauty of the region and coined the terms Côte d’Azur Russe and 
Riviera du Caucase around the turn of the century (Martel, 1908), an 1898 expe-
dition by the Russian geographer Voeikov found the coastal area unsuitable for 
development. Voeikov rather suggested developing the nearby mountain village 
of Krasnaia Poliana into a health resort (Conterio, 2015, pp. 99–100). Upon local 
initiative, a first hotel called ‘Kavkazskaia Rivera’ was built in the village of 
Sochi in 1909. Moreover, an association for the exploration of the Matsesta hy-
drogen-sulphurous springs was set up in the 1900s to capture the mineral wa-
ters. An unassumingly equipped spa opened in 1912. The influx of vacationers 
remained modest, with about 10,000 visitors annually on the eve of WW I.  

2 Building the “Magnitostroi of Health”  
(1930–1950s) 

Nothing much changed in the Sochi area in the 1920s. Soviet reports testify that 
malaria continued to molest vacationers, whose number had risen slowly to 
about some 50,000 annually in the early 1930s (Kurorty, 1983, pp. 321–322). 
Among them were some prominent members of the party leadership, including 
Anastas Mikoian. Mikoian allegedly recommended the curative powers of the 
Matsesta springs to Stalin, who was suffering from a rheumatic left arm. (Sam-
sonenko, 2008). Whatever may be the degree of truth to this founding myth of 
Soviet Sochi, Moscow in the early 1930s embarked on a grandiose development 
scheme for the area, turning Sochi into a flagship project for the emerging Sovi-
et variety of social tourism. At the time, travel and recreation in a health resort 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:25



 The Magnitostroi of Health | 69 

 

became an important part of the system of rewards bestowed upon the party 
elite and distinguished shock workers (Noack, 2011).  

In the framework of the Second Five-Year-Plan (1933–1937), which foresaw 
the ‘socialist’ reconstruction of cities like Moscow, Gorkii and Novosibirsk, the 
party leadership decided to transform Sochi into a ‘world class health resort’, 
catering for the toiling masses and its leadership. Besides a significant exten-
sion of facilities and capacities (up to 25,000 beds), the plan entailed the con-
struction of 40–50 exclusive ‘state dachas’, to be used by Stalin and his inner 
circle. In order to accomplish this flagship project, the partly leadership chose a 
top-down approach characteristic for the period. Sochi’s transformation was 
included on the list of priority projects of the Second Five-Year-Plan. Substantial 
financial means and planning facilities were set aside to elaborate a first ‘gen-
eral development plan’ for Sochi in 1933–1934. Stalin invested a special plenipo-
tentiary with the coordination of the construction work. Commissioner Alek-
sandr Denisovich Metelev and his staff of 55 employees had to look after the 
allocation of human and technical resources necessary for the realisation of the 
project. They squatted inside the building of Sochi’s city Soviet, ousting the 
local deputies. (Samsonenko, 2007, pp. 11–13; Conterio, 2014, p. 249).  

Sochi’s limited development as a destination at the time – it counted barely 
15 recreational facilities in 1933 – allowed for a ruthless ‘overwriting’ of the 
existing town and its immediate surroundings, the coastal stretch between the 
Mamaika and Kudepsta rivers. The best Soviet architects and landscape plan-
ners, including M. Ginzburg, V.A. and A.A. Vesnin, responsible for the 1935 
Moscow general development plan, were commissioned to design sanatoria and 
clinics, to lay out parks, avenues, bridges or embankments. I. Merzhanov’s icon-
ic building of the Voroshilov Sanatoria in Sochi won a Grand Prix at the 1937 
Paris World Fair. A cable car, dubbed the “sanatorium metro”, linked the Cen-
tral Military and the Ordzhonikidse sanatoria to the beaches (Zaitsev, Komarov 
& Maksimov, 1963, p. 108). As splendid as the architecture of these sanatoria 
was, they were never meant to cater for the masses, to whom they were dedicat-
ed in official propaganda. The average size of the new sanatoria rarely exceeded 
250–300 places. Large sanatoria were seen as “poor for relaxation” by Stalin 
himself (Conterio, 2014, pp. 245–246). 

Overall, the Sochi general plan reads like an extension of the 1935 Moscow 
plan, transforming Sochi into a remote subtropical suburb of Stalin’s capital, 
mirroring the latter’s lavish layout. In terms of investment, Sochi’s planning 
was excessive and indeed inefficient. It was meant to impress. Once having 
passed through the procedures of medical and political vetting and been admit-
ted to the spa, selected Soviet vacationers received heavily subsidised vouchers 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:25



70 | Christian Noack  

 

that entitled them to enter a perfectly organised world of leisure, juxtaposed to 
the mundane experiences of life and labour during the Soviet industrialisation 
drive (Noack, 2012, p. 190; Koenker, 2013, pp. 29–34).  

More than the ‘socialist reconstruction’ of huge cities like Moscow, the con-
version of a peripheral village into a world-class spa entailed a substantial 
transformation of landscape and vegetation. In a recent study, Johanna Conterio 
has demonstrated in detail that Sochi’s planners drew on the international ex-
perience and emulated, to a degree, the contemporary creation of Miami Beach 
out of Florida’s Everglades. For the sake of the creation of a luxurious subtropi-
cal spa, Soviet urban planners and landscape architects connected the older 
and the newly emerging recreation facilities through a central axis, the palm-
lined highway Stalin Prospect. They obviously expected tourists to admire land- 
and cityscapes rather from a car window than as pedestrian flâneurs. In and 
around this central resort area, riverbeds received embankments, flooding areas 
were drained and ravines spanned by viaducts. The existing vegetation of the 
Black Sea coast, which, according to a contemporary, did not “correspond to its 
climatic features”, was replaced by evergreen Mediterranean plants in order to 
correct the ‘mistakes of nature’ and introduce ‘the flora suitable’ to what was 
now hailed as the ‘Soviet subtropics’ (Conterio, 2014, p. 252 quote; Conterio, 
2015, pp. 92–93, 104–107, 111). 

Initially urban planners and landscape architects, not medical specialists 
determined the way the project was implemented. This insinuates that the mak-
ing of ‘new’ Sochi was much less about the accessibility of health resorts for the 
Soviet masses than about the creation of a built-up Soviet dream-world, just as 
happened in the USSR’s capital Moscow. Only in the course of time were medi-
cal experts from the Commissariat of Public Health able to augment their au-
thority. They prevented, for example, city planners from offering several decen-
tralised facilities for taking waters. Matsesta’s springs remained a centralised 
institution for water cures under the control of the local doctors (Conterio, 2015, 
pp. 108–109).  

The spatial distribution of the facilities mirrored both the medical prefer-
ences and the ideological tenets of a Stalinist health resort. Sochi’s littoral was 
reserved for parks, theatres, cinemas and, above all, the sanatoria, providing for 
the most prestigious and at the same time the most strictly regulated form of 
vacationing. Less prestigious facilities, like rest homes, were banned to the 
foothills, whereas the mountainous area was meant to be converted into forest 
parks, from which visitors would enjoy panoramic views over the resort and its 
surroundings (Stadelbauer, 1986, p. 12; Samsonenko, 2007, pp. 8–10).  

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:25



 The Magnitostroi of Health | 71 

 

In spite of the allocation of human and financial resources, the implementa-
tion of such grandiose designs in Sochi created innumerable difficulties. They 
resulted, among other things, from the disproportional investment in the devel-
opment of the resort. Between 60 and 70 million roubles were spent on the con-
struction of the spas in 1934 alone, whereas the budgets assigned to the munici-
pality for the development of the infrastructure amounted only to 2.5 million 
roubles in the same year. Sochi at the time had no sewage system and only ru-
dimentary supplies of fresh water or electric power. Beyond that, the town with 
18,000 permanent inhabitants as of 1930 and the surrounding villages had to 
accommodate the bigger part of 30,000 workers, who could not be recruited 
locally (Samsonenko, 2008, pp. 4–5). 

Such disproportionate investment during Stalin’s times resulted in a partial 
urbanisation of Sochi, producing sharp contrasts between the central health 
resort area and the other quarters of the town. Moreover, water and energy sup-
plies played out as a zero-sum game – the more was siphoned away for the rec-
reational area, the more the local population had to live with shortages. More 
pressing were the poor housing conditions. Besides the construction workers, 
the extensive medical and service personnel for the new facilities had to be 
housed. As was the case for construction workers, only a small number of this 
service personnel could be recruited locally (Kuznetsova, 2012, p. 193). Hence 
barracks built for the workers were not demolished when construction ended. 
Instead, they were used as accommodations for the sanatoria staff. By 1960, no 
less than 4,000 families were living in such barracks (Zaitsev, 2009; 
Natolochnaia, 2010, p. 55). Investors, i.e., Soviet enterprises aiming at the con-
struction of vacation facilities, and immigrants from other parts of the country, 
often retired army officers, competed with the locals for rare housing space or 
building grounds. The miserable wages in the recreational sector acerbated the 
problems. Low service culture and high labour turnover remained problematic 
throughout the Soviet period. An attempt at addressing both issues was the 
practice of the municipal housing administration to demand uninterrupted 
employment for some years in Sochi as a prerequisite for accepting people on 
waiting lists (Zaitsev, 2009, p. 39; Natolochnaia, 2008a). The net influx of popu-
lation during the Stalin years changed Sochi’s ethno-demographic outlook sig-
nificantly. By the end of the 1950s, 70 percent of Sochi’s 80,000 inhabitants 
were ethnic Russians (Tveritinov, 2008, p. 29). 

Sochi’s Soviet developers also failed to solve other urgent tasks, like that of 
sufficient food supplies. Due to limited and expensive transport facilities, the 
planners aimed at provisioning the resorts from neighbouring villages. This 
required a redeployment of existing tobacco plantations for horticulture. Alt-

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:25



72 | Christian Noack  

 

hough the collectivization drive of the 1930s facilitated the regime’s interference 
with local agricultural production, the lack of investment and incentives meant 
that food supplies from the region remained precarious and poor in quality 
(Samsonenko, 2007, p. 11; Vershadskaia, 2006, p. 23).  

In order to address the transport bottleneck and to accelerate the extensive 
construction work, a seaport was built in Sochi in the late 1930s. The necessary 
construction of large piers almost immediately exacerbated ecological prob-
lems, as currents along the shore changed and began to wash away the pebble 
beaches of the recreational zone to such a degree that some of new resort struc-
tures were at risk of slipping into the sea. The beaches had suffered already 
from the illegal but tolerated excavation of gravel, sand and stone for construc-
tion. This made extensive stabilisation of the shoreline necessary. Frequent 
landslides occurred also in other build-up parts of the area, due to strong sea-
sonal rainfall swelling the rivers (Samsonenko, 2007, p. 11; Natolochnaia, 
2008b, p. 15; Conterio, 2014, pp. 277–278).  

In many respects, Sochi’s development as a Stalinist flagship resort had 
thus little bearing on the development of the region at large. By contrast, the 
spa remained a deliberately secluded funfair for “the best of the best of our 
country: shock workers of factories, mines, towers, fields, etc., engineering-
technical workers, scientists, commanders of the Red Army, industry, etc.” 
(Kurorty SSSR, 1936, p. 20). The new resort areas around the central alley, the 
Kurortnyi prospekt, with their symmetric parks and squares, displayed all the 
splendour of palatial resort architecture. The outlook of the remaining parts of 
the town, however, changed only slowly. Tellingly, Sochi’s palm-lined highway 
ended abruptly at the borders of the resort. Tourists and travellers circulated 
within a narrow developed zone or were transported to a few designated desti-
nations beyond, like the mountain resorts of Krasnaia Poliana or Lake Ritsa, 
without getting into much contact with the local population (Samsonenko, 
2007, p. 10; Natolochnaia, 2009, p. 21).  

3 Soviet Mass Tourism (1960s–1980s) 

Many of the structural development problems listed above did not escape the 
attention of the Soviet administrators, however, they had little power to address 
them efficiently. In 1938 and 1948, respectively, more competences for tourist 
development were concentrated with the trade unions, and after the war, Sochi 
was severed from the Krasnodar region and designated a special territorial unit 
directly subordinated to the government of the RSFSR. These measures had 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:25



 The Magnitostroi of Health | 73 

 

little effect, and it was only with Khrushchev’s consumerist turn that the charac-
ter of Soviet tourism began to change.  

With Khrushchev, ‘organised’ vacations ceased to be the privilege of a se-
lect few. Instead, the regime perceived and presented tourism and recreation as 
important pillars of the Soviet welfare state, demonstrating the superiority of 
the communist system over the capitalist. Accordingly, the regime’s earlier rhe-
torical commitment to mass tourism became more genuine. It propagated tour-
ism and travel as purposeful socialist forms of leisure and consumption, espe-
cially after Soviet citizens received rising wages and enjoyed reduced 
workloads, including the five-day working week introduced in 1967. Against the 
backdrop of the Soviet citizens’ growing wealth and mobility, the encourage-
ment to travel for leisurely purposes proved a self-fulfilling prophecy. It seems 
that already early in the 1960s, more people travelled independently, i.e., oth-
erwise than with the tourist infrastructure provided by the trade unions (Noack, 
2006, p. 281).  

Access to the resorts for larger parts of society, including previously exclud-
ed groups like collective farmers, became thus a declared priority. With refer-
ence to the fact that statistically a higher percentage of workers had enjoyed 
holidays in the 1920s than in the 1950s, trade unions pressed for a significant 
extension of tourism facilities. In fact, the trade unions gained more responsibil-
ity in the process, when in 1960 a large number of medical and recreational 
facilities passed under their jurisdiction (Noack, 2006, pp. 282–284). In Sochi, 
however, they were only in charge of less than half of the recreational facilities, 
and of a slightly higher percentage of the simpler accommodations in the tourist 
sector, amounting to one third of the available beds (Zaitsev, 2009, p. 43).  

Finally, in 1964, the Soviet government decided on making hitherto unprec-
edented investments into the tourist infrastructure to boost capacities. The 
terms ‘mass tourism’ and ‘tourist industries’ entered the Soviet vocabulary. The 
government refrained, however, from making structural changes. Within trade 
unions, different branches (councils) bore responsibility for stationary vacation-
ing termed otdykh (‘recreation’) and more mobile forms called turizm (Hen-
ningsen, 1993, pp. 25–39). Neither was this institutional separation between 
tourism and recreation given up, nor was the creation of a strong economic 
branch with its own ministry on the cards. Only such an upgrade would have 
provided a Soviet ‘tourism industry’ with administrative leverage comparable to 
that of the favoured (heavy) industry branches in the USSR’s planned economy.  

In the post-Stalin period, however, some significant administrative prepara-
tions preceded the large-scale investments designated to turn Sochi into a des-
tination for real ‘mass tourism’. A second general plan for Sochi had foreseen a 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:25



74 | Christian Noack  

 

moderate growth of the resort within the limits of the existing town in 1957, but 
the planners quickly realised the constraints – there was too little space to en-
hance capacities as envisioned (Zaitsev, 2009, pp. 38–39). In 1960, the Council 
of Ministers of the RSFSR staked out a three-kilometre-deep coastal area and 
interdicted construction work for purposes other than recreation within this 
zone. Finally, it decreed in 1961 the creation of “Great Sochi”, with a joint ad-
ministration for a 145-km stretch of the Caucasian Black Sea coast from Magri 
(near Tuapse) in the northwest to Adler in the southeast, on the boarder to Ab-
khazia. This was to allow more coordinated regional planning, including the 
ascription of specific functions to certain areas or towns within the zone, and a 
cost-effective extension of necessary infrastructure including roads, supplies, 
canalisation etc. (Stadelbauer, 1986, pp. 11–12; Zaitsev, 2009, pp. 41–43). 

A third and, again, very ambitious general plan, devised for 25 years, was 
finally announced in 1967. The plan suggested enhancing Sochi’s capacities 
from 42,000 to 200,000 beds. It also dealt with zoning, the coordination of the 
local economy for better service of the resort, the development of infrastructure 
and housing, with road construction and the designation of ‘green areas’ 
(Zaitsev, 2009). Over the whole coastal stretch, the 1967 general plan suggested 
a ‘division of labour’ between eight recreational zones. While central Sochi 
remained a recreational area characterised by sanatoria and clinics, less devel-
oped places like Adler or Dagomys were earmarked for cheaper tourist accom-
modation, including some facilities for increasingly popular family vacationing. 

The plan implied a clear move away from the grandeur of Stalinist resort ar-
chitecture and hence from expensive and labour-intensive sanatoria. Since 
Khrushchev had taken power, they were faulted for their ‘excessive’ ornamenta-
tion. Sanatoria were to be replaced by cheaper facilities in the style of the inter-
national second modern. This allowed for the development of types of projects 
that could be realised easily and cheaply across the Soviet Union, using stand-
ardised building material. Again, Soviet planners sought inspiration abroad. 
Instead of Miami and Florida, as in the 1930s, the new role models of the 1960s 
were closer to home, in the recently finished Romanian and Bulgarian Black Sea 
resorts, targeting foreign tourists and currencies. The Soviet planners “translat-
ed” the foreign models into large ‘recreational complexes’, realised first in the 
Sochi area in the late 1960s with Adler’s kurortnyi gorodok. It featured standard-
ised sleeping corpuses to accommodate no less than 2,000 vacationers at a time. 
(Conterio, 2014, pp. 377–382, 391–394). Modern and more spacious new build-
ings, which allowed for a quicker increase of capacities, supplemented or re-
placed some of the historical buildings of the pre-revolutionary or early Soviet 
period in Sochi as well (Zaitsev, 2009, p. 41). At the time, observers often de-

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:25



 The Magnitostroi of Health | 75 

 

cried the erection of concrete, steel and glass hotels and accommodations. 
Among the criticised “modernisms” of the period were, for example, luminous 
(neon) signs as “advertisements” of hotels and restaurants (Noack, 2012, 
pp. 193–194). Indeed, the 1970s and early 1980s saw the completion of some of 
the largest vacation facilities in contemporary Europe, such as the 25-storey 
resort “Neva” in central Sochi with 500 beds or the recreational complex “Da-
gomys” (1975–1981) with 2,500 beds, 1,650 of which were located in a 27-floor 
skyscraper (Zaitsev, 2009, p. 43).  

In the wake of the construction boom of the 1960s and 1970s, Sochi lost 
much of its heterotopic appeal (Foucault, 1986). Architecture that was more 
mundane spread across the entire coastal zone. The urban character of the 
growing agglomeration – with a planned increase from 173,000 to 250,000 in-
habitants – was emphasised, not just by the erection of skyscrapers, but also by 
the transformation of Sochi into a venue for regular film, music or youth festi-
vals. Although the bottlenecks in rail and road transportation remained, the 
emergence of affordable air transport moved Sochi closer to Moscow and other 
big industrial cities in Russia. By the end of the 1970s, no less than 60 per cent 
of the visitors seem to have come by plane, as opposed to 38 per cent by train 
and a mere 2 per cent by car (Stadelbauer, 1986, p. 12). 

At the same time, the realisation of the new grand designs suffered from old 
problems and challenges. To begin with, Sochi’s builders lacked the capacities 
for construction work of this scale. The completion of facilities trailed signifi-
cantly behind the planned schedules. Moreover, in many stretches of Great 
Sochi earlier planning mistakes obstructed the envisioned extension of the rec-
reational zone. Water and energy supplies remained insufficient, a sewer sys-
tem was in many places totally absent. Except for ‘old Sochi’, the coastal rail-
way line and the highway cut off the resorts from the shore. The geographic 
setting would have made any attempt at redirection prohibitively expensive. 
Therefore, circular roads were not built, although this had been suggested in 
the general plan (Zaitsev, 2009, pp. 42–45; Conterio, 2014, p. 386).  

While recreational areas and a large natural preserve were protected at least 
on paper, industrial areas and living quarters were not separated. More invest-
ment into apartment buildings notwithstanding, the housing problems re-
mained acute and the government continued to restrict residency permits to 
those employed in Sochi. (Zaitsev, 2009, p. 39). The planned increase of facili-
ties alone stretched the already strained labour and housing conditions further 
(Kuznetsova, 2012, p. 194). Beyond that, effective coordination was continuous-
ly thwarted by the fact that even if the municipality would find ways to come to 
terms with the two councils (for recreation and tourism); it encountered difficul-

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:25



76 | Christian Noack  

 

ties in reining in the owners of the vedomstvennye facilities (i.e. those run direct-
ly by enterprises or branches of the state or party apparatus). More than thirty 
different organisations owned recreational facilities in Sochi at the time, which 
accounted for about two thirds of the capacities in the kurort, and these organi-
sations would rather be guided by self-interest than by commitment to the 
common good (Zaitsev, 2009, p. 43). 

With hundreds of thousands of ‘non-organised’ tourists flooding into Sochi 
during the summer season, the problem of overcrowding reached hitherto un-
known dimensions. By the mid-1970s, two thirds of the 3.5 million annual visi-
tors were such ‘wild tourists’. Unable, and possibly also unwilling to limit the 
influx of the ‘wild tourists’, the trade union councils and the municipality called 
for pragmatic solutions (Noack, 2016, pp. 66–71). Private letting of beds to tour-
ists had been tolerated throughout the Soviet period, even though it conflicted 
with Soviet law. Since the early 1960s, the trade unions broadly attempted to 
organise and control this sub-letting, even claiming such additional capacities 
in their statistical reports (Stadelbauer, 1986, p. 13). The emergence of private 
accommodation, however, further increased the strain in the housing sector and 
impacted on the occupational structure. By 1980, about 30 per cent of the inhab-
itants were directly employed in the official Soviet tourist infrastructure. About 
10 per cent worked in the medical sector, 8 per cent in trade and catering, 6 per 
cent in food production and processing, 5 per cent in transport and 4 per cent in 
the cultural sector. Yet even Soviet statistics allowed for no less than 90 per cent 
of all income in Sochi being generated by tourism. (Stadelbauer, 1986, pp. 12–
13). During the period, it seems, tourism finally pervaded all walks of social and 
economic life in Great Sochi.  

For the ‘wild tourists’ vacationing in Sochi required a lot of improvisation 
and acceptance of substandard room and board, not to mention congested 
beaches. It became increasingly difficult to keep the crowds away from the rec-
reational zones and beaches originally reserved for “organised tourism”. Under 
such circumstances, Sochi hardly represented an ideal socialist model world for 
the vacationers anymore. What made ‘wild tourism’ attractive was that it al-
lowed an escape from the narrow social contexts of mundane life, facilitating, 
for example, extra-marital relationships, as many married men and women 
travelled on their own. Organised tourists, too, received holiday vouchers only 
for themselves and not for their spouses. In the Soviet Union, ‘moon bathing’, 
i.e., flirts at night, were widely practiced in sanatoria, and the idea that “the 
health resort is a place where romance flourishes” was firmly established in 
Soviet popular culture (Conterio, 2014, pp. 356–357 quote; Kuznetsova, 2014).  

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:25



 The Magnitostroi of Health | 77 

 

The congestion with tourists could not but exacerbate Sochi’s fragile eco-
logical situation. Water reservoirs were heavily polluted, as were the beaches 
and the sea. The sewage system and treatment plants were deficient or ineffec-
tive. Attempts to boost agricultural production in the area by the use of fertilis-
ers and herbicides added to the water pollution. Towards the end of the Soviet 
period, increased individual traffic and mobility also implied heavier air pollu-
tion (90 per cent caused by road traffic). Allegedly, mobile ‘wild tourists’ littered 
large parts of the area, putting up improvised campsites wherever they could. 
Waste disposal was organised in an inefficient way and a waste incinerator built 
in 1984 never functioned properly (Chernogaeva & Federov, 1992; Ermachkov & 
Cherkasov, 2007). 

An important factor contributing to local disenchantment was the fact that 
the general plan of 1967 was never fully implemented. During the 1970s, the 
government channelled less investment than planned into Great Sochi. Many 
projects took years to build, causing complaints by vacationers and locals ex-
posed to excessive noise, traffic and pollution through ongoing construction 
work. In 1981, Great Sochi offered some 81,000 beds in recreational facilities 
and another 15,000 places in tourist accommodations. It was twice as big as 
“Great Yalta” on the Crimea, yet a far cry from the initially planned 200,000 
beds.  

Hence, the “pragmatic” shifts towards mass tourism under Khrushchev and 
Brezhnev allowed planners to envisage a more coordinated touristic valorisa-
tion of the Sochi region in the shape of yet another huge development scheme. 
However, like their predecessors under Stalin, they failed to create the neces-
sary structural preconditions for managing a project of this scope. The contem-
porary use of terms like ‘mass tourism’ or ‘tourism industry’ suggests that vaca-
tioning was increasingly being understood to be more than a social benefit to be 
bestowed on the population. This ‘tourist industry’, though, was neither put on 
an equal footing with the traditionally “strong” industrial branches in the USSR, 
nor revalued as a serious instrument of economic revenue. The institutional 
fragmentation between the competing central and local institutions continued, 
even if Sochi’s direct sub-ordination to Moscow allowed by-passing at least the 
regional level of the Krasnodar district. The centre’s stronger leverage often 
meant in practice that regional or local interests were ignored by planners and 
decision makers. Where the plans had foreseen more regional coordination, the 
latter was in practice often thwarted by the competition for scarce resources, for 
the allocation of building spaces, financial investments in communal infrastruc-
ture or access to scarce local construction capacities and labour forces. Ironical-
ly, the emergence of genuine mass tourism in the area in the shape of ‘wild 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:25



78 | Christian Noack  

 

tourism’, an unintended ‘collateral damage’ resulting from the structural defi-
ciencies of Soviet social tourism, proved to have more of an impact on regional 
development than some of the grand designs by Soviet tourism planners, which 
could only partly be realised. ‘Wild’ independent mass tourism changed socio-
economic relations beyond the planners’ imaginations, and further threatened 
the region’s fragile ecology, suffering already from the damages inflicted by 
Soviet planning megalomania.  

4 Transition  

Gorbachev’s perestroika, aiming at raising the efficiency of the Soviet economy 
and cutting excessive spending, could not but have an impact on the develop-
ment of a tourist destination like Sochi. The most import factors were, on the 
one hand, the attempts to convert state enterprises into self-financing units 
from 1988 onwards, which affected the labour- and cost-intensive sanatoria 
more than other branches of Soviet tourism. On the other hand, the economic 
downturn meant that Soviet citizens, probably for the first time in decades, had 
less money to spend on leisure, including on their holidays, which hit unorgan-
ised vacationers harder than those who travelled on the highly subsidised 
vouchers (putevki). All of this became obvious only with a certain time lag. With 
its 5.2 million tourists, the year 1988 constituted the apex of Soviet tourism in 
Sochi in terms of annual visitors (Ermachkov, 2010b, p. 57).  

One might have expected that new opportunities to open small businesses 
in the form of cooperatives, provided by Gorbachev’s cautious economic re-
forms, might have helped to overcome some bottlenecks in the Soviet tourism 
service sector. The new cooperatives emerging during perestroika, however, 
meant initially little more than legalising existing grey or black market practic-
es. Of the 1,200 cooperatives that have been accounted for in Sochi in 1990–
1991, only a small percentage was directly involved with tourism: 7 per cent in 
catering, 6 per cent in trade, less than 2 per cent in medical services or sports, 
respectively (Bagdasarjan, 2008, p. 39). Prohibitively high prices for goods and 
services prevented the cooperative sector from redressing some of the structural 
deficits in the decaying field of organised tourism. A case in point was the food 
supply to Sochi, which had always been problematic. It deteriorated further 
during perestroika. By contrast, cooperatives rather suggested new services like 
beauty parlours, gambling machines or video shops (Ermachkov, 2010a, p. 76).  

The transition to a market economy and the ensuing privatisation politics 
after 1992 quickly eliminated ‘organised’ tourism in its Soviet shape, which had 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:25



 The Magnitostroi of Health | 79 

 

been chronically suffering from a lack of investment already in the late Soviet 
period and during Gorbachev’s tenure (1985–1991). With the end of Communism 
and the launching of ‘shock therapy’ in 1992, Russia’s social insurance system, 
which had financed much of the touristic infrastructure during Soviet times, 
collapsed, too. Initial hopes that foreign investors might take over the economi-
cally inefficient and overstaffed sanatoria quickly evaporated. Efforts to launch 
a third general plan for Sochi in 1990–1991 had failed to materialise due to the 
demise of the USSR. The policies of the new Yeltsin government reverted to 
symbolism rather than to massive investment: Sochi was declared a resort of 
‘federal importance’ in 1993, but in the midst of privatisation and an economic 
slump there was little effort to preserve the costly structures and facilities of 
Soviet social tourism in the country. Beyond that, the decaying tourism facilities 
in Russia suffered from the fact that the slowly emerging Russian middle class 
began to discover cheap travel destinations abroad.  

The lack of a new general plan and the collapse of the trade unions’ tourism 
and recreational administrations in 1991 unexpectedly empowered the munici-
pal government. Sochi remained directly subordinated to Moscow, but the cen-
tre was neither able to grant viable development perspectives nor to allocate 
financial subsidies. At least in theory, the city government, in the Soviet past 
one of the weaker agents in tourism development, could have profited from the 
demise of the trade unions’ tourism administrations and from the difficulties 
Moscow encountered in exerting its power in the peripheries.  

The influence of Sochi’s city council on local and regional tourism devel-
opment remained limited, though, as for example the practice of skirting the 
official accommodation agencies, already widespread during the late Soviet 
period, continued. Depending largely on local resources, the municipal gov-
ernment, not entirely for altruistic reasons, allowed relatively uncharted devel-
opment for the next decade. Initially, the private sector boomed in the form of 
comparatively small-scale family businesses, i.e. hostel-type accommodations 
or small cafes. Thriving private entrepreneurship, tax evasion and a more or less 
destitute municipal treasury characterised the situation throughout the 1990s. 
Contemporary observers complained about ‘squatting’ by private businesses on 
beaches and the littoral and recalled with some degree of nostalgia the decaying 
splendour of Sochi during its Soviet past, with its alleged ‘socialist orderliness’, 
which was rhetorically juxtaposed with the ‘uncontrolled spread of capitalism’ 
(Suchkov, 2009). 

The centre’s importance as the driving force behind Sochi’s impressive de-
velopment under socialism became thus fully apparent at the very moment that 
Moscow’s grip on Sochi was loosening. Neither international players nor local 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:25



80 | Christian Noack  

 

agents were able or willing to take over this dominant role. With the economic 
recovery in the Putin era, however, incomparably greater opportunities opened 
up for a collaboration between the city government and real estate developers. 
No longer was the extension of recreational facilities for the masses or the pri-
vatization of the tourist business on the cards, but the sale of secondary homes 
and apartments in ‘Moscow’s southernmost suburb’ to the new Russian elite. 
Sochi’s city governments allowed for rezoning in the most attractive parts of 
Great Sochi, including the ‘recreational areas’ (kurortnaia zona). Whereas the 
1970s and 1980s had seen a new type of recreational architecture partly over-
write the Stalinist spa, the ‘intrusion’ of residential building construction and 
the demolition of existing sanatoria began to change the actual functions of 
central parts of the town and littoral in general during the 2000s (Suchkov, 
2009). The social and economic consequence of these changes during the 1990s 
and 2000s have not yet been thoroughly researched and mapped. Given the 
relatively unregulated character of the transition years and, presumably, the 
lack of documentation, this process will be difficult to analyse for future histori-
ans of Sochi.  

The ecological consequences of Sochi’s planned and unplanned growth, by 
contrast, are well documented. They became obvious as early as 1991, when 
after two days of strong rain the small rivers swelled, flooding parts of the town 
and washing away roads, gas and electric supply lines, water pipes, sewage 
canals. The floodwaters also destroyed some of the tourist facilities like the 
recreational complex (gorodok otdykha) “Lazerevskoe vzmor’e”. Total damages 
amounted to 163 million roubles, a substantial sum at a time when the state 
treasury was virtually empty (Ermachkov, 2010b, pp. 58–59). Such flooding is a 
regular occurrence in Sochi to the present day (Richmond, 2013, p. 212).  

5 The Olympic Games  

When the federal government started its search for a potential venue to host an 
international mega event like the 2014 Winter Olympics, Sochi’s prehistory 
made it both an improbable and an obvious choice. On the one hand, as a tradi-
tional summer resort it had very little to offer to host a winter-sports event, from 
climate to facilities, except for its closeness to the Western Caucasus mountain 
range. Compared to other areas in the Caucasus, however, the nearby mountain 
village of Krasnaia Poliana, was relatively underdeveloped as a skiing resort. 
But this disadvantage was readily turned into an asset by the promotors of the 
games. By developing Krasnaia Poliana and by building indoor sports facilities 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:25



 The Magnitostroi of Health | 81 

 

in Sochi, they argued, Sochi’s dependence on seasonal summer tourism would 
be reduced, turning it into a “world class, all season resort” (Alekseyeva, 2014, 
p. 161). On the other hand, earlier Soviet development had provided geograph-
ically peripheral Sochi with excellent links to the rest of the country. And after 
years of ‘wild capitalism’, at least parts of the local population could also be 
expected not to be too dismissive of a new, large scale top-down development 
scheme, promising visitors and thus jobs and renewal for Sochi as a tourist 
destination.  

Tellingly, Russia’s federal government under the leadership of Putin took 
the decisions to proceed with the bid for the 2014 Winter Olympics before a solid 
plan for Sochi’s preparation had been elaborated. The International Olympic 
Committee, for its part, did not take exception to the lack thereof when it grant-
ed the right to host the games to Russia in 2007. The new development plan, 
hastily compiled by international development agencies in 2009 (Suchkov, 
2009; Richmond, 2013, p. 204) bore quite some similarities with the 1967 plan as 
to its megalomania. It contained, for example, the promise to increase Sochi’s 
capacities from an estimated 70,000 beds to 200,000, with the aim of raising 
accommodation capacities to about 8 million vacationers annually. It also sug-
gested an extension of the infrastructure, including the long-awaited circular 
roads and new residential quarters, partly in the form of the “Olympic Village”. 
Critics were quick to point out that this extension would have serious ecological 
implications, including a reduction of the protected territory of Sochi’s national 
park (Bakharev, 2009; Suchkov, 2009; Richmond, 2013, p. 211).  

Reminiscent of Stalin’s use of a ‘plenipotentiary’ in the 1930s, a federal law 
disenfranchised the municipality in 2008, and Sochi de facto turned into an 
extra-constitutional zone, allowing for the acquisition of privately owned land 
and facilitating construction without much respect for environmental standards 
(Richmond, 2013, pp. 205–207). Sochi’s inhabitants gladly saw real estate prices 
skyrocket after Sochi had won the bid for the Olympics. They soon recognised, 
however, that the influx of crowds of managers and administrators from Mos-
cow and of an even bigger army of cheap labourers brought from abroad also 
raised the cost of living in the city, again without providing too much employ-
ment opportunities for locals. Worse still, land ownership in the area had been 
poorly documented during the privatisations of the 1990s. This facilitated land 
evictions or the valuing of properties below market prices when compensations 
were negotiated (Alekseyeva, 2014, pp. 164–165).  

Sochi rapidly turned into a vast construction site once more, with almost 
96,000 construction workers labouring around the clock in 2013 to assure that 
the sports facilities, new accommodations and infrastructure would be finished 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:25



82 | Christian Noack  

 

in time (Müller, 2015, p. 191). With ever-mounting time pressure, administrators 
and contractors showed not very much respect for the protection and preserva-
tion of Sochi’s cultural and natural heritage, although the promise to conduct 
the games in a “sustainable, inclusive, environmentally responsible manner” 
had by necessity been emphasised in the successful bid for Sochi. Among the 
worst examples was the building of a highway and a new train line to Krasnaia 
Poliana in the bed of the mountain stream Mzymta. The damage to the land-
scape and environment was aggravated by the discharge of toxic waste into the 
river during the construction period. Drinking water springs in the area threat-
ened the health of thousands of inhabitants. The excavation of gravel from the 
river and the straitening the river bed as well as the illegal felling of trees further 
increased the risk of inundations, endemic to the whole region anyway (Müller, 
2015, p. 192).  

Likewise, the Sochi bidding committee had promised that “all key Olympic 
infrastructure locations have been selected to ensure maximum sustainability 
and legacy”. By contrast, many historic buildings were destroyed in Sochi. This 
is why the monuments of Sochi’s ‘golden age’, i.e. the years of Stalinist opu-
lence, are both celebrated and endangered today. Contemporary tourists revel 
in guided tours to those lavishly decorated sanatoria of Stalin’s time that have 
survived. Nonetheless, surviving monuments of Sochi’s tourism history, like the 
remaining buildings of the 1909 sanatoria “Kavkazskaia Rivera”, were demol-
ished in 2010 (Kuzetsova, 2012).  

Nonetheless, nostalgia for the Soviet past thrives in Putin’s Russia. This in-
cludes, it would seem, a longing for the good old days when Stalin’s mobilising 
dictatorship moved enormous amounts of financial and human resources to 
execute top-down whatever centrally-planned policies had been designed to 
transform the Soviet Union’s peripheries. In its design, the ostensive ‘moderni-
sation project’ Winter Olympics 2014, framed as a mechanism for regional im-
provement by the Kremlin, reverted to the ‘tested’ methods of the Five-Year 
plans. When confronted with the realities, however, the “complexity of the pro-
ject began to overwhelm the government” (Richmond, 2013, p. 204) and plan-
ning turned into improvisation yet again. It was a revenge of the past. The Sovi-
et Union had never elaborated efficient instruments for regional development, 
relying on hyper-centralisation in state administration, party and economic 
planning. Local or regional bodies were at best consulted in the decision-
making process. Khrushchev undertook some rather erratic attempts at decen-
tralisation between 1957 and 1964 with the creation of the “Regional Economic 
Soviets” (Sovnarkhozy). After 1964, however, Brezhnev had immediately re-
established the old hierarchies (Dmitrieva, 1996). Hyper-centralisation col-

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:25



 The Magnitostroi of Health | 83 

 

lapsed with the Soviet Union, but the ensuing period of more regional and local 
self-determination was overshadowed by the economic slump. Russia’s recent 
history since 2000 has been a successful exercise in re-centralisation, and the 
Sochi top-down Olympic project can be understood as an “archetype of Russia’s 
development strategy under the Putin government” (Alekseyeva, 2014, p. 159). 

Predictably, the effects of Stalin’s and Putin’s modernisation drives appear 
quite similar. Aiming to impress in the short term, they produced expensive 
splendid façades with little concern for sustainable regional development. The 
shortcomings quickly became visible. Building trailed years behind the sched-
ule, Sochi’s urban and the regional infrastructure developed totally unevenly 
and partly out of proportion, environmental problems accumulated. Yet the 
amount of corruption reached under Putin seems to be unmatched. Kickbacks, 
preferential treatment in the allocation of tenders or simply virtual contracts 
allegedly siphoned away between 50 and 60 per cent of the 50 billion US dollars 
spent on the games (Richmond, 2013, pp. 204, 212–214; Müller, 2014, p. 154). 

The decision to host the Winter Olympics 2014 in Sochi and the relaunch of 
a (however ‘fake’) general plan in 2009 was initially celebrated by a significant 
part of Sochi’s inhabitants, and by Russian citizens more generally, as a return 
to the heydays of grand Soviet development designs. Such perceptions, howev-
er, could not but be crestfallen. Neither the history of the creation of the ‘magni-
tostroi of health’ in the 1930s, nor the contemporary attempts at staging a sports 
mega-event could arguably ever live up to the grandiose projections produced 
around these projects in Soviet and post-Soviet propaganda.  

Bibliography 
Alekseyeva, A. (2014). Sochi 2014 and the rhetoric of a new Russia: Image construction 

through mega-events, East European Politics, 30(2), 158–174. 
Anonymous (1934). Pervoklassnomu kurortu – dostoinnuiu gazetu, Pravda No. 284, 14 October 

1934, p. 4. 
Bagdasarjan, S. D. (2007). Ekonomicheskie razvitie bol’shogo sochi na zakate ‘perestroiki’ 

(1989–1991 gg.): istoriko-sotsiologicheskoe issledovanie. Bylye gody, 30(1), 19–26. 
Bagdasarjan, S. D. (2008). Sotsiologicheskie issledovaniia v Sochi na zakate ‘perestroiki’ 

(1990–1991 gg. Bylye gody, 31(4), 35–41. 
Bakharev, I. (2009, July 14). Genplan s prirodnymi iz”ianami. Gazeta.ru. Retrieved from 

http://www.gazeta.ru/business/2009/07/14/3222554.html (accessed 2015/08/19). 
Borisov, A. D., & Nevraev, G. A. (1959). Nekotorye voprosy razvitiia kurortov v period semi-

letnogo plana. Voprosy kurortologii, fizioterapii i lechebnoi fizicheskoi kul’tury, 1, 3–11.  
Chernogaeva, G. M., & Federov, E. K. (1992). The impact of recreation in the Black Sea region 

on surface and sea water quality – Sochi case study. GeoJournal, 27, 179–184. 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:25



84 | Christian Noack  

 

Conterio, J. (2014). The Soviet Sanatorium: Medicine, Nature and Mass Culture in Sochi, 1917–
1991. Doctoral dissertation, Harvard University. 

Conterio, J. (2015). Inventing the subtropics: An environmental history of Sochi, 1929–36. 
Kritika, 16(1), 91–210. 

Dmitrieva, O. (1996). Regional Development. The USSR and After. London: UCL Press. 
Ermachkov, I. A., & Cherkasov, A. A. (2007). Ekologicheskaia obstanovka v g. sochi v period 

perestroika (1985–1991 gg.). Bylye gody, 30(1), 27–29.  
Ermachkov, I. A. (2010a). Sochi v period perestroika (1985–1991 gg.): Sanatorno-kurortnaia 

otrasl. Bylye gody, 33(1), 74–82. 
Ermachkov, I. A. (2010b). K voprosu o chrezvychainykh situatsiiakh na territorii bol’shogo 

sochi v period perestroiki. Bylye gody, 33(3), 57–60. 
Foucault, M. (1986). Of other spaces. Diacritics, 16(1), 22–27. 
Henningsen, M. (1993). Der Freizeit- und Fremdenverkehr in der (ehemaligen) Sowjetunion 

unter besonderer Berücksichtigung des Baltischen Raumes. Frankfurt am Main: Peter 
Lang.  

Koenker, D. P. (2013). Club Red. Vacation, Travel, and the Soviet Dream. Ithaca: Cornell Univer-
sity Press. 

Kulikov, N. A. (2009). Regional’naia istoriia: problem podgotovitel’nogo etapa k zimnei olimpi-
ade-2014 v g. sochi (po materialam periodiki 2008–2009 gg.). Nauchnye problem guman-
itarnykh issledovanii, 122. Retrieved from http://cyberleninka.ru/article/n/regionalnaya-
istoriya-problemy-podgotovitelnogo-etapa-k-zimney-olimpiade-2014-v-g-sochi-po-
materialam-periodiki-2008–2009-gg (accessed 2015/08/19). 

Kurorty (1983). Entsiklopedicheskii Slovar. Moskva: Sovetskaia Entsiklopediia. 
Kurorty SSSR (1936). Spravochnik. Moskva-Leningrad: Gosudarstvennoe izdatel’stvo biolog-

icheskoi i meditsinskoi literatury. 
Kuznetsova, L. (2012). Sovetskii kurort kak mesto pamiati. Bulletin des DHI Moscow, 6, 184–

205.  
Kuznetsova, L. (2014). Postranstvo sovetskogo kurorta: svoboda ili kontrol? Novoe literaturnoe 

obozrenie, 126. Retrieved from http://magazines.russ.ru/nlo/2014/126/15k.html  
(accessed 2015/09/02). 

Lipodaev, Y. I. (1987). Sochi, Sochi, Sotschi. Kurorty SSSR, Soviet Health Resorts, Kurorte in der 
UdSSR. Moscow: Planeta. 

Martel, E.-A. (1908). La Côte d’Azur Russe (Riviera du Caucase): voyage en Russie méridionale, 
au Caucase occidental et en Transcaucasie (mission du gouvernement russe, 1903). Paris: 
Delagrave. 

Müller, M. (2015). (Im-) Mobile policies: Why sustainability went wrong in the 2014 Olympics in 
Sochi. European Urban and Regional Studies, 22(2), 191–209.  

Müller, M. (2014). Introduction : Winter Olympics sochi 2014 : What Is at Stake ? East European 
Politics, 30(2), 153–157.  

Natolochnaia, O. V. (2008a). Osobennosti rezhimnogo goroda-kurorta Sochi. Bylye gody, 31(1), 
21–25. 

Natolochnaia, O. V. (2008b). Ratsionalizatorstvo i trudovoi poryv sochintsev po voss-
tanovleniiu i razvitiiu goroda sochi v 1945–1950-e gg. Bylye gody, 31(3), 14–23. 

Natolochnaia, O. V. (2009). Sochi poslevoennyi: gorodskoi poriadok kak osobennost’ rezhim-
nogo goroda. Bylye gody, 32(1), 20–24. 

Natolochnaia, O. V. (2010). Zhilishchnyi fond goroda sochi v poslevoennyi period (1945–1953 
gg.): Problemy i perspektivy. Bylye gody, 33(3), 51–56. 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:25



 The Magnitostroi of Health | 85 

 

Noack, C. (2006). Coping with the Tourist: Planned and ‘Wild’ Mass Tourism on the Soviet 
Black Sea Coast. In A. E. Gorsuch & D. P. Koenker (Eds.), Turizm: The Russian and East Eu-
ropean Tourist under Socialism (pp. 281–304). Ithaca and London: Cornell University 
Press. 

Noack, C. (2011). Building Tourism in One Country? The Sovietization of Vacationing, 1917–
1941. In E.G.E. Zuelow (Ed.), Touring Beyond the Nation: A Transnational Approach to Eu-
ropean Tourism History (pp. 171–194). Farnham: Ashgate. 

Noack, C. (2012). ‘Andere Räume’: sowjetische Kurorte als Heterotopien. Das Beispiel Sotschi. 
In K. Schlögel (Ed.), Mastering Russian Spaces: Raum und Raumbewältigung als Probleme 
der russischen Geschichte (pp. 187–197). München: Oldenbourg.  

Noack, C. (2016). Brezhnev’s ‘Little Freedoms’: Tourism, Individuality, and Mobility in the Late 
Soviet Period. In D. Fainberg & A. Kalinovsky (Eds.), Reconsidering Stagnation in the 
Brezhnev Era. Ideology and Exchange (pp. 59–76). Lanham: Lexington Books.  

Oppengeim, D. G. (1966). Nekotorye organizatsionnye voprosy kurortnogo stroitel’stvo. Vo-
prosy kurortologii, fizioterapii i lechebnoi fizicheskoi kul’tury, 5, 452–455. 

Richmond, W. (2013). Preparations for the Sochi Olympics. In R. B. Ware (Ed.), The Fire Below. 
How the Caucasus Shaped Russia (pp. 203–223). New York: Bloomsbury.  

Samsonenko, T. A. (2007). Sochi – vsesojuznyi: nachalo sotsialisticheskoi stroiki. Bylye gody, 
30(3), 8–15. 

Samsonenko, T. A. (2008). Sovetskaia imperiia: Sochi – udarnaia stroika (1930 gg.) Bylye 
gody, 31(4), 4–12.  

Stadelbauer, J. (1986). Der Fremdenverkehr in Sowjet-Kaukasien. Gesamtstaatliche 
Bedeutung, räumliche Strukturen und Entwicklungsprobleme. Zeitschrift für 
Wirtschaftsgeographie, 30, 1–21. 

Suchkov, V. (2009, January 27). Zimniaia Olimpiada pod ugrozy sryva. Kavkaskii uzel. Retrieved 
from http//www.kavkaz-uzel.ru/articles/148012 (accessed 2015/08/19). 

Tveritinov, I. A. (2008). Bol’shoi sochi v nachale 1990-x gg. Demograficheskaia situatsia. Bylye 
gody, 31(1), 26–29.  

Vershadskaia, O. V. (2006). Vsesoiuznaia perepis’ 1926g.: Chislennost’ i sostav naseleniia 
Sochi. Bylye gody, 29(2), 20–25. 

Vershadskaia, O. V. (2009). Chernomorskaia derevnia v pervoi treti xx v. Sotsial’no-
ekonomicheskii aspekt. Bylye gody, 32(3), 37–45. 

Zaitsev, I., Komarov, A., & Maksimov, I. (1963). Sochi: Putevoditel’ po gorodu. Krasnodar: 
Krasnodarskoe knizhnoe izdate’stvo.  

Zaitsev, A. M. (2008). Bol’shoi Sochi v 1960-e-1970-e gg.: K istorii vsesoiuznoi zdravnitsy – 
otraslevoi podkhod. Bylye gody, 31(2), 29–31. 

Zaitsev, A. M. (2009). Kurortnoe stroitel’stvo na territorii bol’shogo sochi v 1960 – seredine 
1970-x gg. Bylye gody, 32(2), 38,46.  

Zakharova, N. (2009). Udarnaia stroika 1930-x: chto sdelano? Arkhitektura Sochi. Internet 
Zhurnal ob arkhitekture, nedvizhimosti i storitelstve v gorode Sochi. Retrieved from 
http://arch-sochi.ru/2009/11/stroyka1930-e/ (accessed 2015/09/20). 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:25



86 | Christian Noack  

 

Bionotes 
Christian Noack 

Christian Noack is Associate Professor in East European Studies at the University of Amster-
dam and Director of the Amsterdam School for Regional, Transnational and European Studies 
(ARTES): His research interests comprise comparative memory studies in Europe and the social 
and cultural history of the Soviet Union in the post-Stalinist period. He has published exten-
sively on the history of tourism in the USSR. 
 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:25