tw Zeitschrift für Tourismuswissenschaft (Lucius & Lucius) tw Jg. 6 (2014) Heft 2, S. 223-242

NGOs and the making of “development 
tourism destinations”
The case of “destino Guatemala”

Sarah Becklake*

Summary 
This article explores the role of non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in the making of global 
tourism destinations. First, it draws together diverse insights in order to substantiate the impor-
tance of NGOs in the making of global tourism destinations and, second, it empirically highlights 
the role of NGOs in the (re)making of one particular destination: “destino Guatemala”. NGOs in La 
Antigua Guatemala are increasingly engaging with tourism as a NGO resource. In focusing on the 
NGO touristic practice of hosting storytelling events/activities in Antigua, some of which come to 
form virtual/actual “poverty tours”, the article argues that while Antigua NGOs develop and host 
these poverty tours as a means of moving “hearts and wallets”, they are doing considerably more. 
Most notably, they are helping to (re)make Guatemala into a “development tourism destination”.

Keywords: NGOs, tourism, poverty, Guatemala

Zusammenfassung 
Dieser Beitrag untersucht die Rolle von Nicht-Regierungsorganisationen (NROs) bei der Kreierung 
globaler Tourismus-Destinationen. Dabei werden verschiedenartige Erkenntnisse zusammen getra-
gen, mit der Bedeutung von NROs bei der Kreierung globaler Tourismus-Destinationen untermauert 
werden. Anschließend wird empirisch die Rolle von NROs bei der (Re-)Kreierung eines bestimmten 
Reiseziels, nämlich der „destino Guatemala“ analysiert. NROs in La Antigua Guatemala betätigen 
sich zunehmend im Tourismus, um ihn als eine NRO Ressource zu nutzen. Dabei wird insbesondere 
auf Geschichten erzählende Events bzw. Aktivitäten der NROs in Antigua abgezielt. Einige dieser 
Aktivitäten stellen virtuelle bzw. reale „Armuts-Touren“ dar. Es wird die Argumentationslinie entwi-
ckelt, dass die NROs in Antigua, indem sie diese Armuts-Touren als ein Mittel um die „Herzen und 
Geldbörsen“ zu bewegen entwickeln und veranstalten, sie noch deutlich mehr machen. Vor allem 
helfen sie dabei Guatemala (wieder) zu einer „Entwicklungstourismus Destination“ zu machen.

Schlagworte: NROs, Tourismus, Armut, Guatemala

© Lucius & Lucius Verlagsgesellschaft mbH Stuttgart ISSN 1867-9501

* Sociology Department, Lancaster University, Bailrigg, Lancaster, LA1 4YW, United Kingdom
E-Mail: s.becklake@lancaster.ac.uk

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 12:55



224 Sarah Becklake / NGOs and the making of “development tourism destinations” 

1 Introduction

Tourism destinations are not “natural”; 
rather, they are culturally, socially, polit-
ically, and economically made. Over the 
past few decades, “global tourism mobili-
ties” have exploded (Sheller & Urry 2004). 
More and more people are moving around 
the world as “global tourists” – those who 
have the means and the will to travel the 
globe (primarily “Western tourists”) – 
and, consequently, place stakeholders are 
increasingly trying to capture some of the 
economic dividends of this global fl ow; 
this is especially seen through the increased 
use of tourism as a “development tool” 
(Telfer & Sharpley 2008). Places are, thus, 
increasingly being (re)made into “global 
tourism destinations” with the intent of 
attracting and satisfying global tourists. 
Literature surrounding the making and 
selling of global tourism destinations tends 
to focus on governments and the private 
sector; they are conceptualized as having 
the power to make places known, desired, 
and visited. While not to downplay their 
importance, recent trends point to another 
key player in the making of global tourism 
destinations: non-governmental organiza-
tions (NGOs).

NGOs are increasingly engaging with 
tourism. While few have specifi cally stud-
ied the relationship between NGOs and 
tourism (Spencer 2010) those who have – 
whether directly or indirectly – point to at 
least fi ve ways in which this NGO engage-
ment is manifested. NGOs act: 
1. as witnesses and attempted ameliorators 

of some of the deleterious eff ects associ-
ated with certain forms of tourism de-
velopment; 

2. as advocates, consultants, knowledge 
and policy producers, and developers of 
“alternative” – hopefully more socially 
just and/or environmentally friendly – 
tourism forms; 

3. as intermediaries, developers, educa-
tors, facilitators, and/or implementers 
of tourism development projects; 

4. as cultural agents infl uencing tourists’ 
desires and touring practices; and 

5. as tourism service providers and tour-
ist attractions/destinations (see Barnett 
2008; Butcher 2003/2007; Kennedy & 
Dornan 2009; Salazar 2004; Spencer 
2010; Wearing et al. 2005). 

Taken together, these insights point to an 
emerging NGO-tourism nexus.

In suggesting that tourism destinations 
are made through ways of touristically 
seeing, doing, and connecting places both 
symbolically and materially, the article 
moves to empirically explore how NGOs 
are implicated in the discursive and mate-
rial (re)making of one particular destina-
tion: “destino Guatemala”. Based on eth-
nographic research, the article highlights 
how Antigua-based NGOs are increasingly 
engaging with tourism as a means of rais-
ing global recognition, compassion, and 
funds for their projects. Th ree key NGO 
touristic practices are identifi ed: 
1. hosting NGO storytelling events/activities; 
2. attracting/hosting volunteer tourists; and, 
3. providing for- and non-profi t touristic 

services. 
Given space restrictions, focus here is re-
stricted to the NGO practice of hosting 
storytelling events/activities. In hosting 
storytelling events/activities in and around 
Antigua, Antigua NGOs aim to strategi-
cally connect to and benefi t from global 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 12:55



tw Jg. 6 (2014) Heft 2 225

tourists already in Guatemala. But this 
NGO practice, it is argued, is doing much 
more than move global tourists’ hearts 
and wallets. Th rough sharing stories of 
Guatemalan poverty with global tourists 
in Antigua or moving global tourists into 
spaces/places deemed poor, many Anti-
gua NGOs’ storytelling events/activities 
come to form virtual or actual “poverty 
tours”. Th ese virtual/actual poverty tours 
help to construct an NGO gaze – a way 
of seeing Guatemala as a place to do both 
development and tourism; they help to 
discursively (re)make Guatemala into a 
“development tourism destination”. More 
than that, they functionally act as forms 
of “feel good” development tourism and 
work to extend “destino Guatemala” by 
securing and opening “poor”, and often 
“private”, spaces/places to global tourists. 
While remaining sympathetic to the goals 
of Antigua NGOs, by outlining some of 
the discourses and power relations which 
underpin this NGO practice the article 
highlights its implication in the reiteration 
of the imagined and real hierarchical dif-
ferences between Guatemala and the glob-
al North, and between Guatemalans and 
global tourists.

In following this agenda, this article 
adds to the literature surrounding NGOs 
and tourism in fi ve main ways:
1. it identifi es and provides a fi rst attempt 

at mapping the emerging NGO-tour-
ism nexus; 

2. it highlights the importance of NGOs 
in the (re)making of global tourism des-
tinations; 

3. it expands accounts of NGO-types in-
volved in tourism by focusing on small, 
locally embedded NGOs rather than in-
ternational and/or voluntourism NGOs;

4. in not focusing on ecotourism or vol-
untourism, it extends understanding of 
the diff erent ways in which NGOs are 
engaging with tourism/tourists; and, 

5. it provides an account of NGOs and 
virtual/actual poverty tours in the con-
text of Guatemala, which, to this au-
thor’s knowledge, has yet to be done.

2 NGOs and Tourism

Th e global proliferation of both NGOs 
and tourism mobilities are rarely spoken 
about in conjunction; indeed, with the 
exception of a few notable scholars (Bar-
nett 2008; Butcher 2003/2007; Kenne-
dy & Dornan 2009; Salazar 2004; Spencer 
2010; Wearing et al. 2005) and organ-
izations (e.g. NGO Tourism Concern), 
few have specifi cally written about the 
relationship between NGOs and tourism 
(Spencer 2010). Th at being said, one can 
uncover considerable insights regarding 
the increasing role of NGOs in tourism 
in wider tourism-related literature, such 
as that surrounding ecotourism (Duff y 
2008) and voluntourism (Conran 2011; 
Mostafanezhad 2013a/b). But why, how, 
and what kinds of NGOs are engaging 
with tourism? And, most important here, 
what does this mean for the (re)making of 
global tourism destinations?

2.1 The Emerging NGO-Tourism Nexus

First a defi nition of NGOs. NGOs 
are highly diverse and hard to defi ne 
(Ahmed  & Potter 2006). Very broadly 
they can be conceptualized as belonging to 
the “third sector” – that is they are not part 
of the state or the market – and they are 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 12:55



226 Sarah Becklake / NGOs and the making of “development tourism destinations” 

often concerned with issues surrounding 
social justice and poverty reduction (Lewis 
2007). NGOs “can be large or small, formal 
or informal, externally funded or driven by 
volunteers, charitable and paternalistic or 
radical and “empowerment”-based” (Lewis 
2007, p. 13); some work in “campaigning 
and policy advocacy” while others provide 
direct services to their target populations 
(p.  1). While NGO-like organizations 
have existed since antiquity (Salamon 
1994), it was only after the Second World 
War and through the United Nations sys-
tem that such organizations were given 
the title “NGO” (Ahmed & Potter 2006). 
Since then, and especially since the 1990s, 
there has been a considerable proliferation 
of NGOs around the globe. Although the 
actual number of NGOs in the world re-
mains unknown (Ahmed & Potter 2006), 
estimates reach into the hundreds of thou-
sands (Kennedy & Dornan 2009).

NGOs of various types have long 
been indirectly involved with tourism as 
witnesses and attempted ameliorators of 
some of the deleterious eff ects associated 
with tourism development (e.g. displace-
ment, environmental degradation, labour 
exploitation, sex traffi  cking, etc.) (Salazar 
2004; Spencer 2010). More recently, they 
have increasingly become directly involved. 
In general, one can broadly distinguish be-
tween two NGO types which are directly 
engaging with tourism: “tourism-oriented 
NGOs’ (Kennedy  & Dornan 2009) and 
general NGOs (i.e. those not readily as-
sociated with tourism). Tourism-oriented 
NGOs make infl uencing tourism discours-
es and practices their main goal. Starting 
from the perspective that much “main-
stream tourism” – or the “trans-national 
corporate approach to tourism develop-

ment” (Wearing et al. 2005, p. 426) – is 
socially, culturally, and/or environmentally 
harmful, they use various methods to ed-
ucate tourists and public/private tourism 
developers of the deleterious eff ects tour-
ism can have, as well as advocate for and 
consult on “alternative” forms of tourism 
which are thought to be more socially just 
and/or environmentally friendly (Bar-
nett 2008; Wearing et al. 2005). But not 
all tourism-oriented NGOs are the same. 
Rather than being tourism-focused, “Vol-
untourism NGOs’ (Kennedy  & Dornan 
2009) may be better described as tourist-fo-
cused. Voluntourism NGOs primarily see 
themselves as providing “aid in the form 
of [volunteer] service to developing coun-
tries” (Kennedy & Dornan 2009, p. 194). 
In this sense, (re)producing the global fl ow 
of voluntourists – a touristic fl ow premised 
on engaging in non-remunerated activities 
deemed helpful to the places/peoples visit-
ed – is their prime raison d”être.

But many general NGOs of various 
types are also increasingly engaging with 
tourism and, thus, becoming, at least in 
part, tourism- and/or tourist-oriented (see 
Butcher 2007; Spencer 2010). One ex-
planation for this is the increased priority 
given to tourism by development agencies, 
which can be linked to neoliberalism. Ne-
oliberalisation has seen national economic 
development reconceptualised as “success-
ful participation in the world economy” 
(McMichael 2004, p. 155) with the “slo-
gan” of the day being: “Find your niche in 
the global marketplace” (p. 165). Under-
stood to be rich in “natural” tourism re-
sources, the global South is thought to have 
an inherent competitive advantage in the 
export of tourism; indeed, tourism is often 
presented as the global South’s only “realis-

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 12:55



tw Jg. 6 (2014) Heft 2 227

al, social, and/or economic capital. In their 
engagement with tourism, general NGOs 
end up doing many of the same activities 
as tourism-oriented NGOs, such as devel-
oping and implementing various alterna-
tive tourism projects and encouraging and 
facilitating the movement of voluntourists. 
Indeed, the tourism-oriented/general dis-
tinction may become redundant (if it is 
not already) as diverse NGOs increasingly 
engage with tourism.

As the above insights indicate, there 
appears to be an emerging NGO-tourism 
nexus, whereby NGOs are increasingly 
aff ecting tourism discourses/practices and 
tourism is increasingly infi ltrating NGOs’ 
agendas/operations. While clearly much 
could be said about this emerging nexus, 
the focus here is on what it means for the 
(re)making of global tourism destinations.

2.2 NGOs and the (Re)Making of 
Global Tourism Destinations

Drawing upon mobilities scholars, tour-
ism destinations are conceptualized as 
made through ways of touristically seeing, 
doing, and connecting places both sym-
bolically and materially (Sheller  & Urry 
2004). As argued here, NGOs are helping 
(in)form ways of seeing, doing, and con-
necting certain places in the global South 
to the global North as “development tour-
ism destinations”.

NGOs have long been charged with 
helping create ways of seeing the global 
South within the global North. Unlike 
state-led development which relies upon 
taxes, NGO-led development relies upon 
winning competitive grant processes and 
attracting global recognition, compassion, 
and funds from Northern publics (Camer-

tic development path” (Telfer & Sharpley 
2008, p. 17). Neoliberalism has also seen 
NGOs constructed as the preferred devel-
opment partners of global aid donors, who 
channel funds to NGOs as a means of by-
passing (supposedly) ineffi  cient, weak and/
or corrupt states (Ahmed & Potter 2006). 
As a result of these processes, NGOs’ 
roles in international development have 
increased at the same time as tourism has 
been constructed as the global South’s key 
“development tool”. Following, many gen-
eral NGOs are now involved in interna-
tional tourism development projects (see 
Butcher 2003/2007).

However, some general NGOs are also 
turning to tourism strategically; for these 
NGOs tourism represents a means to oth-
er ends. Th is occurs in at least two, often 
interconnected, ways: NGOs promote 
and assist tourism development as a way 
of achieving their wider aims, whether 
conservation or poverty reduction and/or, 
given the increasingly competitive NGO 
funding environment (Cameron & Haan-
stra 2008), various general NGOs have in-
stitutionalized tourism into their funding/
operations models. Th e fi rst strategy sees 
NGOs give touristic value to, for exam-
ple, the natural environment, as a means 
of helping to conserve it (Butcher 2007). 
Th e second strategy sees NGOs engaging 
with “Northern publics” (Cameron  & 
Haanstra 2008) as global tourists; indeed, 
it would appear that NGOs have found 
that moving hearts and wallets is easier if 
you also move bodies. By bringing North-
ern publics to the global South, NGOs 
aim to create changes in the way people 
think about and engage with development 
issues (Salazar 2004; Spencer 2010), as 
well as benefi t from global tourists’ cultur-

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 12:55



228 Sarah Becklake / NGOs and the making of “development tourism destinations” 

on & Haanstra 2008). Th rough fundrais-
ing campaigns, “NGOs constitute one of 
the most important faces of development 
– and forms of development education 
– that is presented to Northern publics.” 
(Cameron  & Haanstra 2008, p.  1486). 
Such campaigns have often relied upon 
stories and images of global poverty, in-
cluding the iconic image of the “starving 
baby” (Manzo 2008) and/or the “Th ird 
World woman” (Dogra 2011). Rather than 
seeing these representations as refl ecting 
the “truth” about the global South, draw-
ing on Escobar (1995) they can be under-
stood as helping to (re)produce the “Th ird 
World” – and, thus, the “First World” – in 
the Western imaginary. Along with these 
geographical categorizations come hierar-
chical identities: Northern publics come to 
see (especially child/female) “‘others’ in the 
South as passive, helpless and sub-human 
victims” (Cameron  & Haanstra 2008, 
p. 1478) and themselves as “benefi cent and 
as possessing the wisdom and agency need-
ed to help Southern ‘others’” (p.  1486). 
In other words, NGO representations of 
poverty can be understood as producing 
what Mostafanezhad (2013b) calls a “hu-
manitarian gaze” – a binary way of seeing 
the world which reproduces a “hierarchy 
between givers and receivers, as well as cir-
cumscribing who is a legitimate benefactor 
of aid”, thus contributing “to the perpetu-
ation of an ‘us’ vs ‘them’ power dynamic” 
(p. 489). Along with this comes a global 
“geography of compassion” (Mostafan-
ezhad 2013a) whereby the “Th ird World” 
and the “Th ird Worlder” are (re)construct-
ed as both poor and deserving of Western 
compassion and humanitarian help.  Put 
diff erently, in their aims to help the glob-
al poor, largely Western NGOs eff ectively 

(re)produce the world through post-colo-
nial ways of seeing.

While such NGO practices may help 
to (re)create the objects of, and the West-
ern compulsion for, “development”, they 
do not necessarily create touristic desire for 
the global South – indeed, such representa-
tions may be seen as antithetical to tour-
ism. However, as NGOs are increasingly 
engaging with and relying upon tourism 
they are also increasingly enrolled in the 
(re)production of touristic ways of seeing 
some places in the global South. Th e most 
obvious and direct example comes from 
voluntourism NGOs. In Keese’s (2011) 
analysis of voluntourism NGO websites he 
found that along with emphasizing pov-
erty and need, they also include touristic 
images and descriptions of the places and 
people where and with whom they have 
programmes. For example, along with 
images of iconic tourism symbols, such 
as Machu Picchu, places are described 
as “exotic” and “beautiful” and people as 
“‘friendly’, ‘warm’, ‘gracious’, and ‘welcom-
ing’” (Keese 2011, p. 273). Indeed, volun-
tourism NGOs appear to take advantage 
of pre-existing touristic representations 
and desires in planning where to develop 
such programmes in the fi rst place. As one 
voluntourism NGO Director states: “‘It’s 
hard to recruit volunteers to go to places 
that no one has heard of, that have little 
natural beauty, and that lack interesting 
places to visit during the programme’ [...]” 
(Interview cited in Keese 2011, p.  276). 
Consequently, it is not necessarily the 
places in most objective need which be-
come the objects of voluntourism NGOs; 
it is the places that are – at least partially 
– already symbolically and materially con-
structed as tourism destinations.

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 12:55



tw Jg. 6 (2014) Heft 2 229

While less explicit, the activities of other 
tourism-oriented and general NGOs (e.g. 
conservation and development NGOs) 
also appear to be contributing to touristic 
ways of seeing the global South. Th is occurs 
through, for example, their advocacy and 
promotion of “alternative tourism”, such 
as ecotourism and voluntourism. While 
alternative tourism exists everywhere, it 
is most associated with the global South 
(Wearing et al. 2005). A key argument be-
hind the promotion of such tourism forms 
is that the global South is “undeveloped” 
and “traditional” and that, somewhat par-
adoxically, alternative tourism can help 
develop and/or conserve it. Conservation 
NGOs, for example, advocate heavily for 
and promote ecotourism in the global 
South as a means to conserve “pristine” 
[read: undeveloped] environments and 
“traditional” [read: not Western] cultures 
(Butcher 2003/2007). Rather than making 
conservation their main goal, development 
NGOs, on the other hand, may advocate 
and promote voluntourism in the global 
South as a means of bringing development 
to the “undeveloped” (Simpson 2004). 
In either case, these activities tend to (re)
present the global South as the last bastion 
of “true” authenticity (MacCannell 1999 
[1976]). Indeed, places and people which 
are perceived to lack development – places 
and people which are deemed “poor” – are 
often represented as more “authentic” and, 
thus, become touristically desirable (Dy-
son 2012; Whyte et al. 2011).

More than a trip into the “authen-
tic”, in their promotion and provision 
of alternative tourism forms, NGOs are 
also helping to (re)make the global South 
as the place to enact “moral” and “cool” 
tourist identities. Along with presenting 

the global South as both poor and tour-
istically desirable, NGOs also present “al-
ternative tourism” as being “moral” tour-
ism. “Moral” forms of consumption are 
growing in popularity in the West. Some 
scholars (see Butcher & Smith 2010) see 
this as emblematic of Gidden’s (1991) 
“life politics”, whereby politics and iden-
tity have moved from production/social 
class to consumption/lifestyle. Th rough 
participating in “moral” tourism, global 
tourists can discursively align themselves 
with environmental/social justice agendas 
and distinguish themselves from the “im-
moral tourism hoards”. Indeed, along with 
altruistic and strategic motivations (Heath 
2007; Lyons et al. 2012), the “moraliza-
tion of tourism” (Butcher 2003) has been 
linked to the popularity of voluntourism 
in the global South (Butcher  & Smith 
2010). Similar processes can be seen in the 
NGO-led celebritization of development, 
which has worked to make “development 
sexy” (Cameron  & Haanstra 2008) and 
going abroad to engage in voluntourism 
one’s chance to “get in touch with their 
inner Angelina” (Mostafanezhad 2013b). 
Voluntourism has become “cool”. Conse-
quently, NGOs have helped to (re)create 
the global South as the place to do “moral” 
tourism and enact moral/cool identities.

Finally – and as already alluded to – 
NGOs are also key providers of alternative 
“moral” tourism forms. Th is can easily be 
seen through the work of voluntourism 
NGOs in creating voluntourism pro-
grammes. Indeed, although the private 
sector is also involved, NGOs are the main 
promoters and providers of voluntourism 
(Keese 2011; Mostafanezhad 2013a), an 
increasingly popular and profi table form 
of tourism (Butcher & Smith 2010; Lyons 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 12:55



230 Sarah Becklake / NGOs and the making of “development tourism destinations” 

et al. 2012). NGOs are also key providers 
of various forms of ecotourism (Butcher 
2007) as well as “poverty tourism” (Whyte 
et al. 2011), also called “slum”, “favela”, 
and “township tourism” depending on ge-
ographical location (Rolfes 2010). In en-
couraging and facilitating the movement 
of global tourists to and within the global 
South, NGOs draw upon and help to build 
global-local networks, connecting and 
bringing diff erent places closer together.

Following these insights, this arti-
cle argues that NGOs are helping to (re)
make certain places in the global South 
into “development tourism destinations”. 
Th us, as NGOs increasingly engage with 
tourism they appear to be helping intersect 
the “humanitarian gaze” with the “tourist 
gaze” (Urry 2002 [1990]) and, thus, the 
global geography of compassion with the 
global geography of touristic desire. Th is 
“marriage of gazes” – the humanitarian and 
the tourist – may be understood as form-
ing an “NGO gaze”, a way of seeing which 
(re)produces some places in the global 
South – those which come to lay at this 
intersection – as both poor and touristical-
ly desirable. Th is way of seeing the global 
South is not without its problems. While 
many NGOs have responded to critiques 
regarding the post-colonial implications of 
“poverty stories” and have since diversifi ed 
their strategies to include positive stories 
and representations of “Others” (Man-
zo 2008), “tourism stories” of the global 
South have also been extensively critiqued 
on the same grounds (Echtner  & Prasad 
2003). Th e NGO gaze engages with both 
of these discourses, helping to (re)produce 
certain places and people as both “poor/
in need of compassion” and “exotic/tour-
istically desirable”. In other words, plac-

es seen through a NGO gaze become the 
places for Northern publics to “do” both 
development and tourism.

Moreover, NGO-endorsed and provid-
ed “alternative tourism” may be better de-
scribed as “development tourism”. While 
development tourism has been defi ned 
as NGO-organized “fi eld trips” (Salazar 
2004) or “study tours” (Spencer 2010) to 
visit the “developing world”, by opening 
this defi nition up, development tourism 
may be understood as an umbrella concept 
for all NGO-endorsed/provided tourism 
forms in the global South. Th us, what 
these NGO tourism forms have in com-
mon is that they are all premised on and 
help to (re)construct the imagined, and 
often real, diff erences between the “devel-
oping” and “developed” worlds. Th at is, 
they not only rest on ideas surrounding 
the “undeveloped” and “traditional” glob-
al South, as some scholars have suggested, 
they also help to extend neoliberalising 
processes into new arenas, such as privat-
izing and commodifying international de-
velopment (Mostafanezhad 2013a/b) and 
nature (Duff y 2008). While NGO-en-
dorsed tourism is often promoted and cel-
ebrated as “moral” tourism, these insights 
suggest the need for deeper critical refl ec-
tion on the wider doings of NGOs’ tour-
istic practices. Let us now turn to explore 
these processes in one destination in the 
global South: “destino Guatemala”.

3  Antigua NGOs and the (re)
Making of “Destino Guatemala” 

Welcome to Guatemala! Th e Guatema-
lan government and tourism industry 
are actively seeking to make Guatemala a 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 12:55



tw Jg. 6 (2014) Heft 2 231

globally competitive tourism destination 
(Government of Guatemala 2012); in so 
doing, they draw upon and market Gua-
temala’s “natural” tourism resources, most 
noticeably its nature, history, and “living 
Maya culture”. However, based on fi ve 
months of ethnographic fi eld research in 
La Antigua Guatemala (Antigua for short) 
in 20131, which is further complemented 
by six months of NGO work experience 
in the same location in 2010, this article 
suggests that NGOs are playing a pivotal 
role in the (re)making of Guatemala into 
a global tourism destination of a diff erent 
sort: a “development tourism destination”.

3.1 NGO Touristic Practices in 
Antigua, “The Land of the NGOs‘

Antigua is Guatemala’s tourism jewel. In-
deed, many global tourists visiting Guate-
mala only go to Antigua; for them Antigua 
is Guatemala. At the same time as being 
Guatemala’s tourism jewel, Antigua is also 
“the land of the NGOs” (Interview: NGO 
Program Director, 10/09/13). While there 
is no offi  cial data concerning how many 
NGOs exist in Guatemala and/or in Anti-
gua specifi cally, Antigua appears to be the 
“epicentre” of Guatemala’s vibrant NGO-
scene2. Within Antigua one can fi nd both 
international NGOs (i.e. with projects in 
many countries) and local NGOs (i.e. only 
operating in Guatemala). Local NGOs 
can further be divided between those that 
are founded and funded by Guatemalans 
or foreigners, with the latter making up 
the most prominent NGOs in the com-
munity3. While the majority of literature 
on NGOs and tourism focuses on inter-
national and/or voluntourism NGOs, 
this article focuses on local development 

NGOs in Antigua. Even more narrowly, 
because of their prominence and engage-
ment with tourism, the analysis is limit-
ed to local development NGOs founded 
and funded by foreigners (from here on 
out: Antigua NGOs) and consequently all 
of the NGO workers (from here on out: 
NGOers) interviewed were of nationalities 
other than Guatemalan. As a result, the 
research cannot account for how volun-
tourism, international and/or local Guate-
malan NGOs may engage with tourism in 
Guatemala diff erently.

To date, scholars researching alternative 
tourism forms in Guatemala have tended 
to focus on cultural [read: Maya] tourism 
(Little 2004; Tegelberg 2013), ecotour-
ism (Bascomb & Taylor 2008; Hearne & 
Santos 2005), or voluntourism (Vodop-
ivec & Jaff e 2011; Vrasti 2012), with the 
role of NGOs only sometimes specifi cally 
highlighted. But the role of NGOs can-
not be ignored. Given the ever more diffi  -
cult funding environment, many Antigua 
NGOs, for example, are increasingly see-
ing global tourists as a potential NGO re-
source. To them global tourists represent: 
listeners and spreaders of NGO stories; 
global contacts, which can augment NGO 
email lists and social media followers; po-
tential voluntourists and child sponsors; 
sources of skills and donations/funds; and 
consumers of NGO touristic off erings. In 
their strategic aims to link to global tour-
ists, Antigua NGOs are engaging in three 
key touristic practices: 
1. hosting NGO storytelling events/activ-

ities; 
2. attracting and hosting voluntourists; 

and, 
3. providing for- and non-profi t touristic 

services, such as running NGO lan-

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 12:55



232 Sarah Becklake / NGOs and the making of “development tourism destinations” 

guage schools, restaurants, and the like. 
Due to space restrictions, here focus is 
placed on the NGO touristic practice 
of hosting storytelling events/activities 
in and around Antigua.

3.2 Hosting NGO Storytelling 
Events/Activities

Imagine you have just arrived in Antigua 
and want to know what there is to do. You 
will probably turn to Antigua’s two widely 
distributed touristic magazines: Revue and 
Qué pasa. Published every month, these 
magazines let both locals and tourists know 
“what is going on”. A quick fl ip through 
either magazine on any given month and 
one can fi nd feature articles on the work 
of diff erent Antigua NGOs, as well as 
many announcements for NGO storytell-
ing events/activities ranging from: public 
lectures/talks; cultural performances and 
art exhibitions; fi lm screenings; fundrais-
ing evenings, such as dinners, wine tast-
ings, music and pub nights, and parties; 
garage sales and raffl  es; charity sporting 
events, such as runs or hikes; and NGO 
tours. If not found in Revue or Qué pasa, 
information about these NGO events/ac-
tivities can also easily be found on bulletin 
boards and information points in popular 
cafes and restaurants throughout the city. 
Indeed, it would be hard not to come 
across an NGO story or an announcement 
for an NGO event/activity while visiting 
Antigua. Far from being peripheral to 
“mainstream tourism”, there are diff erent 
NGO events/activities on off er every week 
in Antigua helping make it a dynamic and 
interesting place to be.

Often held exclusively in English, 
NGO storytelling events/activities can be 

conceptualized as strategically construct-
ed touristic spaces to tell NGO stories 
of Guatemalan poverty to global tourists 
(and other foreigners) in Antigua, high-
light the work that Antigua NGOs are 
doing to address this, and get global tour-
ists emotionally and fi nancially involved. 
Consequently, NGO storytelling events/
activities start from three implicit as-
sumptions: that global tourists in Antigua 
already see Guatemala through a tourist 
gaze; that global tourists in Antigua do not 
know but will be interested in knowing 
“real Guatemala”; and, that once global 
tourists know the facts about “real Guate-
mala” they will care and want to help. Put 
diff erently, by sharing stories of Guatema-
lan poverty with global tourists, Antigua 
NGOs aim to add a humanitarian gaze to 
global tourists’ presupposed tourist gaze. 
In so doing, as suggested below, they (re)
make Guatemala through an NGO gaze – 
a place to not only do tourism, but also 
development. Furthermore, these NGO 
storytelling events/activities also function-
ally act as forms of “development tourism”. 
Th at is, in either bringing representations 
of Guatemalan poverty into Antigua for 
the consumption of global tourists or mov-
ing global tourists to places/spaces deemed 
“poor”, they come to form virtual or actual 
“poverty tours”.

3.2.1 Virtual Poverty Tours: Bringing “Poor  
 Guatemala” to Global Tourists in  
 Antigua

According to many NGOers, Antigua is 
not representative of “real Guatemala”, 
which to them is “poor Guatemala”. As 
one NGOer clearly proclaimed: Antigua is 
a “tourist bubble”4. Consequently, even if 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 12:55



tw Jg. 6 (2014) Heft 2 233

global tourists are already in Guatemala, if 
they remain in Antigua, NGOers suggest 
that they have not really seen or done “real 
Guatemala”. To use MacCannell’s (1999 
[1976]) terminology, relatively wealthy 
Antigua is seen as a tourism “front-stage” 
full of “staged authenticity”. Another 
NGOer states:
[...] if people come here and they just come 
to Antigua and they sit in the park and they 
drink a latte and they like, you know, buy a 
necklace and a table cloth and go zip-lining, 
you know, they haven’t seen Guatemala and 
they have a very rose coloured view of what is 
going on here. (Interview: NGO Consultant, 
04/09/13).

Antigua NGOs assume that if global 
tourists stay in the bubble of Antigua their 
“rose coloured” views of Guatemala will 
not to be challenged. Th ey will continue 
to see Guatemala through a tourist gaze 
and not come to know “real/poor Guate-
mala”. Th ey will, furthermore, not come 
to understand why and how they can, and 
should, help Guatemala and Guatemalans. 
In eff orts to introduce “real Guatemala” to 
global tourists and inspire them to help, 
many Antigua NGOs bring “poor Guate-
mala” into Antigua through off ering virtu-
al poverty tours.

Th e concept of virtual poverty tours 
speaks to the symbolic movement of 
“slums” into consumptive spaces/plac-
es. As noted by various scholars, “slums” 
move and are globally consumed through 
movies (Diekmann  & Hannam 2012), 
art exhibitions (Linke 2012), and by be-
coming trademarks which work to brand 
consumptive spaces/places and products 
(Freire-Medeiros 2013). Th e “travelling 
slum” allows Northern publics to tour 
places of poverty fi guratively and imagi-

natively; tour participants’ bodies remain 
removed from actual poverty. Th rough 
their storytelling events/activities, Antigua 
NGOs engage in the movement of Gua-
temalan “asentamientos” (shantytowns) 
or “pueblos pobres” (poor villages) – in 
the form of stories, photos, artefacts, and 
sometimes even “live benefi ciaries” – into 
touristic spaces (e.g. cafes/restaurants/bars/
hotels) in Antigua. In so doing, they create 
new (non-profi t) touristic experiences to 
be consumed by global tourists in Antigua.

A clear example of such virtual poverty 
tours are the Antigua NGO lectures held 
every Tuesday at a popular tourist cafe. As 
one NGO lecture announcement states:
TALK: [NGO name]5, come learn about the 
problems facing the families of Guatema-
la and the ways in which [NGO name] is 
working every day to help solve them. Dona-
tion Q25. [...] (Revue, March 2013, p. 28)

In teaching global tourists about “the 
problems facing the families of Guatema-
la”, such announcements and their corre-
sponding lectures do a lot more than raise 
compassion and funds. Promoted and held 
within Antigua, they help to discursively 
reconstruct Antigua as not representative 
of “real Guatemala” in the minds of glob-
al tourists. Tourists coming across such 
NGO announcements are implicitly told 
that if they really want to know Guate-
mala (i.e. have an “authentic experience”), 
they need to attend an NGO lecture to 
“learn”. Furthermore, through these an-
nouncements and their corresponding lec-
tures Antigua NGOs position themselves 
as having special access to and a genuine 
willingness to share “real/poor Guatemala” 
– or “backstage Guatemala” – with global 
tourists. Indeed, in conversation with one 
NGOer they suggested that the Govern-

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 12:55



234 Sarah Becklake / NGOs and the making of “development tourism destinations” 

ment and for-profi t tourism sector want to 
hide the “bad part” of Guatemala and not 
“make tourism out of the poor, of the real-
ity of Guatemala” (Interview: NGO Tour 
Guide, 22/04/13). Conversely, in their ef-
forts to strategically link to global tourists, 
Antigua NGOs are willing to show the 
“bad part” and, thus, are willing to “make 
tourism” out of “real/poor Guatemala”.

But virtual poverty tours do not only 
off er global tourists “authentic” glimps-
es into “real/poor Guatemala”, they also 
actively tell global tourists what they can 
and should do while in Guatemala. Th is 
is well-illustrated by another NGO lecture 
announcement:
TALK: [Founder name] founded [NGO 
name] in September 2011 out of a clear 
need to assist an indigenous family in [town 
name...]. [Founder name] helps them link 
to services such as health, employment, and 
education. Like so many, they want to create 
a better life for themselves and their children. 
[...] Hear [founder name] talk more about 
this project and how you might help this 
family and others in [town name]. Q25. [...] 
(Revue, April, 2013, p. 24).

While global tourists may attend a 
NGO lecture to learn about “real/poor 
Guatemala”, scholars have noted that 
NGO representations of poverty have also 
been linked to feelings of “pity”, “guilt”, 
and ultimately “compassion fatigue” 
(Cameron  & Haanstra 2008, p.  1479-
80). Rather than evoke negative feelings 
and reactions, Antigua NGOs aim to 
empower and motivate global tourists to 
help. Indeed, many such lectures end with 
an invitation to join the NGO’s email list, 
share the NGO story, come to visit the 
NGO (i.e. move from a virtual to an ac-
tual poverty tour), volunteer, donate and/

or fundraise. Furthermore, such events are 
sold and consumed as “moral” tourism. 
Th us, global tourists attending such events 
– which usually ask for a small donation 
– are thanked for their contribution to-
wards Guatemalan development (i.e. their 
contribution to the NGO). Without ever 
leaving their roles as tourist-consumers, 
global tourists can “feel good” about their 
role in Guatemala and enact “moral” tour-
ist identities.

Yet not all NGO storytelling events/
activities are so sombre. Other events steer 
on the side of touristic entertainment rath-
er than education; instead of challenging 
the tourist gaze they embrace and utilize 
it. Th is is well-seen through the various 
cultural performances that Antigua NGOs 
host. As one NGO announcement states:
BENEFIT DANCE: Mayan dances by in-
digenous children from [NGO name] a local 
charity dedicated to helping more than 30 
indigenous children in [town name]. Th ey 
are working hard to keep these children in 
good health, to educate them and to preserve 
the local Mayan traditions such as the lan-
guage and dance. Donation Q25. [...] (Re-
vue, February, 2013, p. 24)

Th e Maya, especially Maya women 
and girls who still wear their traditional 
clothing, have long been the key touristic 
signifi ers of Guatemala (Little 2004); they 
are also one of the most disadvantaged 
groups in Guatemala with many NGOs 
dedicated to helping them. NGO story-
telling events/activities such as the one 
advertised above can be understood as en-
gaging in the non-profi t commodifi cation 
of the Maya; they draw upon tourist fasci-
nation with the “exotic Maya” as a means 
of attracting donations to be used to help 
the “poor Maya”. Th e Maya become the 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 12:55



tw Jg. 6 (2014) Heft 2 235

primary objects of the NGO gaze; they are 
seen as the most “in need” and the most 
“attractive” to help.

While not wanting to deny the trans-
formative potentialities (especially for 
NGOs and global tourists) within these 
NGO-created educative/aff ective touris-
tic spaces, it is also important to highlight 
how virtual poverty tours are embedded 
and implicated in the reiteration of various 
unequal imaginings and social relations. 
For example, through such poverty tours, 
global tourists are (re)produced as powerful 
and moral agents of development, whereas 
Guatemalans are largely (re)produced as 
poor, needy, and exotic victims. Indeed, 
such divisions remain unquestioned, as do 
the global structural inequalities which al-
low certain people to be sitting in a tourist 
cafe in Antigua learning about how they 
can and should help “Guatemalan Oth-
ers”. Th is NGO practice is, furthermore, 
not only implicated in the privatization 
and (non-profi t) commodifi cation of de-
velopment, but also the touristifi cation of 
the “objects of development”. Th is is clear-
ly highlighted by the “poor” children who 
are enrolled in touristic performances of 
Maya culture as a means of earning money 
for their sponsoring NGO.

3.2.2 Actual Poverty Tours: Moving Global  
 Tourists into “Poor Guatemala”

Besides bringing “real/poor Guatemala” to 
global tourists in Antigua, some Antigua 
NGOs are also moving global tourists into 
“real/poor Guatemala”; they are off ering 
actual poverty tours. Th e NGO rationale 
behind off ering actual poverty tours is 
the assumption that the “fi rsthand [read: 
embodied] experience” of Guatemalan 

poverty and NGO projects will help create 
a stronger emotional, and thus fi nancial, 
link between the tourist and the NGO. 
Some NGOs appear to bet on this. Th us, 
while many NGO tours are fee-based – 
and are thus used as a direct NGO fund-
raising mechanism – some are free or by 
donation only. Whether fee-based or by 
donation, Antigua NGO tours often fol-
low a similar format. Hosted by NGOers, 
they take global tourists on a tour of the 
communities in which the NGO works; 
provide a description of the living condi-
tions and challenges faced by the commu-
nity; off er a look inside some spaces not 
usually open to tourists; visit the NGO 
project itself; provide information about 
what the NGO is doing to help; and, tell 
global tourists how they can help and/or 
get involved.

Studies of actual poverty tours have 
highlighted their growing popularity and 
suggested that tourists participate in them 
in their search for “authentic experiences” 
(Dyson 2012) and/or in their desire for 
adventure and “thrill” (Steinbrink 2012). 
As already noted, Antigua NGOs tend to 
present Antigua as “inauthentic” to global 
tourists. Th is is no more clearly seen than 
through their promotion of their actual 
poverty tours. For example, one Antigua 
NGO tour invites global tourists to “Step 
off  the tourist trail... [and] See the real 
face of Guatemala” whereas another calls 
itself the “Experience Guatemala Tour”, 
inviting global tourists to “experience the 
way real Guatemalans live and work!” 
Th rough such announcements global tour-
ists quickly learn that “authenticity” starts 
where Antigua’s city borders end. Having 
already highlighted how Antigua NGOs 
discursively link “the real” to “the poor”, 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 12:55



236 Sarah Becklake / NGOs and the making of “development tourism destinations” 

and how NGO touristic off erings are sold 
and consumed as “moral” tourism forms 
allowing for the construction of “moral” 
tourist identities, here the focus turns to 
how – through their actual poverty tours 
– Antigua NGOs are securing and open-
ing “poor” and “private” spaces/places to 
global tourists.

In Guatemala, known for its high levels 
of crime and violence (O”Neill & Th omas 
2011), “getting-off -the-beaten-track” can 
be diffi  cult and dangerous. Scholars of 
poverty tourism in other “dangerous coun-
tries” have noted government and tourism 
industry strategies used for the pacifi cation 
of place and people making way for tour-
istic consumption (Freire-Medeiros 2013). 
Th is begs the question of how small NGOs 
are able to secure global tourists outside 
of the “tourist bubble” of Antigua. One 
NGOer explains their ability to secure 
global tourists in “tough neighbourhoods” 
as an outcome of community gratitude. 
She states:
[W]e have a really, really, really good relation-
ship with the community. [...] we’ve built up 
a really strong reputation for our NGO [...]. 
So when we’re there it’s kind of, there’s like a 
mutual respect between community members 
and ourselves, especially when we’re walking 
through some of the tougher neighbours up at 
the top of the hill where our [NGO school] 
kids come from. A lot of those families, ei-
ther the family themselves have somebody, 
you know, related to them that’s going to our 
school, or they have a neighbour that’s going 
to our school, so there’s a lot of confi dence in 
those neighbourhoods that nothing is going to 
happen. (Interview: NGO Operations Man-
ager, 12/04/13)

As this NGOer indicates, the commu-
nity is imagined as grateful towards the 

NGO and thus protecting of the NGO 
tour. But this NGO tour does not only 
walk around the community, it also brings 
global tourists into (normally) private spac-
es, including two family-run businesses. As 
the NGOer explains, these small business-
es volunteered because they are grateful for 
the help and attention the NGO is bring-
ing to their community; they are, thus, 
seen as grateful and generous:
[...] neither of them are families that go to 
our school, or really have anything to do 
with our school, other than that they’re really 
generous in letting us come once or twice a 
week, and take photos in their business. We 
give them a Christmas present every year [...] 
but that’s really the only benefi t that they get 
from it. Th ey’re getting no direct sales or any-
thing. (Interview: NGO Operations Manag-
er, 12/04/13).

Th ese are highly positive interpre-
tations. Without denying gratitude, we 
must not forget what underpins it. Guate-
mala has been progressively neoliberalized 
(Th omas et al. 2011) and “development” 
has largely been outsourced and privatized 
in NGOs, resulting in increased violence, 
poverty, and dependency on NGOs. Th e 
construction of positions of gratitude, in 
short, is highly political. Furthermore, a 
focus on gratitude – which works to affi  rm 
the presence and doings of NGOs and 
global tourists – may hide other, perhaps 
less affi  rmative, feelings.

Besides gratitude, which tends to bring 
up images of passivity, Guatemalans may 
also tactically engage with NGO tours 
as a survival strategy. For example, on 
one NGO tour I was brought inside a 
private home that had been built by the 
NGO. Before entering the home I asked 
the NGO tour guide how this space was 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 12:55



tw Jg. 6 (2014) Heft 2 237

opened to the tour; he explained that the 
single-mother had volunteered because she 
was grateful to the NGO for building her 
a house. However, the simplicity of this 
reading was soon thrown into question. 
After meeting the single-mother, entering 
her family’s one-room dwelling, and listen-
ing to the tour guide explain the construc-
tion process, the woman explained that 
she still did not have access to a stove or 
a source of water in her home; she asked 
the guide how she might get more help 
from the NGO. Th e tour guide defl ect-
ed her inquiries and told her she would 
have to speak with her social worker. On 
the way out, the woman then asked how 
many more times she would have to host 
the tour. One interpretation of this inter-
action is that when further NGO help did 
not seem forthcoming, the NGO tour was 
no longer welcomed. While highlighting 
how Guatemalans may strategically engage 
with NGOs’ touristic practices for their 
own benefi t, the unequal power relation-
ship between the NGO and the woman 
was made very clear when the NGO tour 
guide told her that it was her responsibility 
to fi nd a replacement home for the tour if 
she no longer wanted to host it.

While actual poverty tours may be ef-
fective in showcasing NGOs’ “good work” 
and creating emotional reactions in glob-
al tourists, they also bring “the private/
domestic sphere into the public realm for 
the consumption of Western audiences” 
(Dogra 2011, p.  336) and, in so doing, 
they appear to deny the humanitarian 
principle of “respect for human dignity” 
(Manzo 2008). Indeed, due to this very 
concern, not all Antigua NGOs are willing 
to bring global tourists into private homes. 
An NGO tour guide explained that the 

number one complaint they receive about 
their NGO tour is that they do not take 
tourists inside a “poor person’s home” (In-
terview: NGO Tour Guide, 22/04/13). As 
he suggests: tourists want to see “the real; 
they want to see everything”, but at the 
same time: 
Th ey can’t really, like, think about what, you 
know, what is the meaning if there’s a group 
of ten people, foreign people, walking into 
their house and, like, taking pictures of their 
daily life and how, how poor they are. It’s, 
they don”t think so much, actually, behind, 
I don’t know. (Interview: NGO Tour Guide, 
22/04/13).

However, while this NGO does not 
bring global tourists into a “poor person’s 
home”, it does bring them into another 
space not normally opened to touristic 
consumption: their NGO-run school. In 
fact, Antigua NGOs do not have to rely 
upon Guatemalan gratitude or generosity 
to open many new spaces to global tour-
ists; rather, through the NGOization of 
health and education, they own them. All 
the NGO tours attended, for example, 
included a stop at their respective NGO 
projects, including: health clinics, com-
munity centres, and schools. One NGOer 
describes how bringing tourists to their 
NGO-run school is strategic, as it helps to 
develop tourists into future donors and/or 
child sponsors, but, she also states:
[...] it also kind of creates this weird zoo-like 
atmosphere at the school, where we have sud-
denly this group of white people like walking 
though our schools during recess [...] as kind 
of an outside person that’s helping to facilitate 
this, you do feel kind of weird about the fact 
that you’re like parading these people through 
to see your kids, when they’re just like hav-
ing a normal school day, you know. Um, so 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 12:55



238 Sarah Becklake / NGOs and the making of “development tourism destinations” 

we struggle with that little bit.” (Interview: 
NGO Operations Manager, 12/04/13)

Th is NGO negotiates the “weirdness” 
that ensues by asking tourists not to take 
pictures of the children in the school; they 
try to dampen the tourist gaze. But not all 
NGOs express this concern. On another 
NGO tour the guide specifi cally encour-
aged the tour participants to take pictures 
and interact with the children. Th is begs 
the question of how the tour participants 
(and foreign NGOers for that matter), 
would feel about global tourists coming 
to their children’s schools to gaze, take pic-
tures, and/or interact with them.

4 Conclusion: Guatemala 
as “Development Tourism 
Destination”

Most studies of the making of global tour-
ism destinations focus on governments and 
the tourism industry. Switching focus, this 
article argued that more attention needs to 
be given to NGOs. In taking up this chal-
lenge, it started by identifying and mapping 
an emerging NGO-tourism nexus. As was 
suggested, NGOs’ increased engagement 
with tourism can be linked to shifts in the 
global political economy of development, 
which has seen NGOs become the key in-
ternational development actors and tourism 
become the development tool of the global 
South. As NGOs have proliferated around 
the world, so too has competition for glob-
al recognition, compassion, and funds. In 
looking for new ways to maintain their 
programmes, many NGOs are turning to 
tourism. Consequently, the privatization of 
development in NGOs has been accompa-
nied by its (non-profi t) commodifi cation.

Th e article then moved to argue that this 
nexus is having considerable impacts on 
how some places in the global South are 
being seen, done, and connected to global 
tourism mobilities. As NGOs increasing-
ly engage with tourism they are helping 
to (re)produce some places in the global 
South through an NGO gaze – a way of 
seeing which combines humanitarian and 
tourist gazes. Th e NGO gaze, thus, diff ers 
from the humanitarian gaze in that it is re-
served for those places which have already 
been, at least partially, discursively and 
materially constructed as “tourism destina-
tions”. Seeing through an NGO gaze helps 
to (re)produce places to “do” both develop-
ment and tourism; it helps make “develop-
ment tourism destinations”. Furthermore, 
in off ering “development tourism” forms, 
NGOs have become key providers of de-
velopment tourism experiences and, thus, 
are helping to touristically connect the 
global North to certain places in the global 
South. Th ese processes, as was highlighted, 
can be seen as drawing upon and helping 
to reiterate both imagined and real hier-
archical diff erences between the so-called 
“developing” and “developed” worlds and 
between “Others/Westerners”.

Turning to the case study, the article 
explored the role of Antigua NGOs in (re)
making “destino Guatemala”. While the 
Guatemalan government and tourism in-
dustry are trying to attract global tourists 
through highlighting Guatemala’s nature, 
history, and Maya culture – and down-
play the “bad side” of Guatemala – as the 
NGO touristic practice of hosting story-
telling events/activities highlights, Antigua 
NGOs are sharing the “bad side” with 
global tourists. In their aims to earn com-
passion and funds, Antigua NGOs tell sto-

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 12:55



tw Jg. 6 (2014) Heft 2 239

ries of Guatemalan poverty to global tour-
ists already in Guatemala and, in so doing, 
they instruct global tourists to not only see 
Guatemalan “beauty” but also Guatema-
lan “hurt”; they want to add a humanitari-
an gaze to global tourists’ presuppose tour-
ist gaze. Th is NGO touristic practice may 
be particularly potent in shifting ways of 
seeing Guatemala and Guatemalans. Th eir 
non-profi t status and direct contact with 
“poor” places and people imbues Antigua 
NGOs’ representations of “Guatemalan 
Others” as both trustworthy and author-
itative. In learning to see Guatemala/Gua-
temalans through an NGO gaze, global 
tourists learn that Antigua is “inauthentic” 
and that Guatemala is a place to do tour-
ism and development.

Antigua NGO storytelling events/
activities also functionally act as forms of 
development tourism. More than off ering 
global tourists something interesting to 
“do” in and around Antigua, they also try 
to empower and motivate global tourists 
to get involved in Guatemalan develop-
ment; in a sense, they ask global tourists to 
become more than mere “tourists”. How-
ever, NGOs also link “doing development” 
to the consumption of their touristic of-
ferings. Th us, without ever having to leave 
their roles as “tourist-consumers”, through 
the consumption of NGO touristic off er-
ings, global tourists are thanked for their 
contribution to Guatemalan development, 
and, thus, can “feel good” and enact “mor-
al” tourist identities. Furthermore, as seen 
through the case of actual poverty tours, 
NGOs are also helping make new tour-
istic spaces. In using their powerful posi-
tions within the communities they work, 

Antigua NGOs are securing and opening 
“poor” and “private” spaces/places, as well 
as their own projects, to global tourists; 
they are, thus, helping to redraw the bor-
ders of “destino Guatemala”.

While it is clear that Antigua NGOs 
engage in these practices as a means of sup-
porting their eff orts to help Guatemala and 
Guatemalans, even the best of intentions 
can have unintended consequences. As 
was suggested, Antigua NGOs’ virtual/ac-
tual poverty tours help to discursively (re)
produce the “developed global North/un-
developed Guatemala” distinction, as well 
as the hierarchical identity categories of 
the “compassionate/powerful/moral West-
erner” and the “poor/needy/exotic/grateful 
Guatemalan”. Furthermore, such practices 
implicate Antigua NGOs not only in the 
extension of neoliberalism through the 
(non-profi t) commodifi cation of develop-
ment, but also the touristifi cation of the 
people and places they aim to help. While 
these interpretations come down hard on 
Antigua NGOs, the NGOers spoken with 
also indicated their awareness of some of 
the problems associated with their tour-
istic practices. Th ey pointed to a “Catch 
22”, whereby tourism presents itself as a 
potent way to fund their programmes, but 
also includes the objectifi cation of poverty 
and Guatemalans. In trying to attend to 
this, some Antigua NGOs are drawing 
borders around where they bring global 
tourists and what tourists are allowed to 
do in the spaces/places they bring them. 
Such critical NGO self-refl ection ends this 
article on an optimistic note: the wider 
“doings” of the NGO-tourism nexus are 
open to reconfi guration6. 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 12:55



240 Sarah Becklake / NGOs and the making of “development tourism destinations” 

Bibliography

Ahmed, S. & Potter, D. M. (2006). NGOs in 
international politics. Bloomfi eld: Kumarian.

Barnett, T. (2008). Infl uencing tourism at the 
grassroots level: Th e role of NGO Tourism 
Concern. Th ird World Quarterly, 29(5), 
pp. 995-1002.

Bascomb, B. & Taylor, M. (2008). Ecotourism 
and sustainability in a Q”eqchi” Maya com-
munity, Guatemala. FOCUS on Geography, 
51(3), pp. 11-16.

Butcher, J. (2003). Th e moralisation of tour-
ism: Sun, sand ... and saving the world? Lon-
don/New York: Routledge.

Butcher, J. (2007). Ecotourism, NGOs and de-
velopment. London/New York: Routledge.

Butcher, J. & Smith, P. (2010). ‚Making a diff er-
ence”: Volunteer tourism and development. 
Tourism Recreation Research 35(1): pp. 27-36.

Cameron, J. & Haanstra, A. (2008). Develop-
ment made sexy: How it happened and what 
it means. Th ird World Quarterly, 29(8), 
pp. 1475-1489.

Conran, M. (2011). Th ey really love me! Inti-
macy in volunteer tourism. Annals of Tour-
ism Research, 38(4), pp. 1454-1473.

Diekmann, A. & Hannam, K. (2012). Touris-
tic mobilities in India’s slum spaces. Annals 
of Tourism Research, 39(3), pp. 1315-1336.

Dogra, N. (2011). Th e mixed metaphor of 
‚third world woman”: Gendered representa-
tions by international development NGOs. 
Th ird World Quarterly, 32(2), pp. 333-348.

Duff y, R. (2008). Neoliberalising nature: Glob-
al networks and ecotourism development in 
Madagasgar. Journal of Sustainable Tourism, 
16(3), pp. 327-344.

Dyson, P. (2012). Slum tourism: Representing 
and interpreting ‚reality” in Dharavi, Mum-
bai. Tourism Geographies: An International 
Journal of Tourism Space, Place and Envi-
ronment, 14(2), pp. 254-274.

Echtner, C. M. & Prasad, P. (2003). Th e context 
of third world tourism marketing. Annals of 
Tourism Research, 30(3), pp. 660-682.

Escobar, A. (1995). Encountering development: 
Th e making and unmaking of the third world. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Freire-Medeiros, B. (2013). Touring poverty. 
London/New York: Routledge.

Giddens, A. (1991). Modernity and self-iden-
tity: Self and society in the late modern Age. 
Oxford: Polity.

Government of Guatemala. (2012). Política 
nacional para el desarrollo turístico sosteni-
ble de Guatemala 2012-2022. Retrieved 
from: http://www.segeplan.gob.gt/down-

Notes:

1 Th e fi eldwork upon which this article is based 
was undertaken as part of the author’s PhD 
research, which more widely looks at the em-
bodiment of global tourism destination com-
petition. In total, the author held 39 formal 
interviews and engaged in extensive participant 
observation in both the profi t and non-profi t 
sectors in Antigua.

2 Interviews: NGO Program Director, 10/09/13; 
NGO Operations Manager, 12/04/13; NGO 
Executive Director, 04/09/13.

3 Interviews: NGO Program Director, 10/09/13; 
NGO Operations Manager, 12/04/13.

4 Interview: NGO Operations Manager, 12/04/13.

5 All names of NGOs, towns, or founders have 
been removed so as not to draw particular at-
tention, either positive or negative, to any par-
ticular NGO.

6 Acknowledgements – Th is paper was fi rst pre-
sented at the conference ‘Destination Slum! 2: 
New Developments and Perspectives in Slum 
Tourism Research’ and benefi ted considerably 
from the questions/comments it received there. I 
would also like to thank my PhD supervisors Dr. 
Anne-Marie Fortier and Professor John Urry, as 
well as the two anonymous reviewers, for their 
helpful comments and suggestions given to ear-
lier drafts. Of course, all errors are mine alone. 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 12:55



tw Jg. 6 (2014) Heft 2 241

loads/clearinghouse/politicas_publicas/Tu-
rismo/Politica_Nacional_DTS_Guatema-
la_2012_2022.pdf [Accessed 23/04/2014].

Hearne, R. R. & Santos, A. C. (2005). Tourists’ 
and locals’ preferences toward ecotourism 
development in the Maya biosphere reserve, 
Guatemala. Environment, Development and 
Sustainability, 7, pp. 303-318.

Heath, S. (2007). Widening the gap: Pre-uni-
versity gap years and the ‚economy of experi-
ence”. British Journal of Sociology of Educa-
tion, 28(1), pp. 89-103.

Keese, J. R. (2011). Th e geography of volunteer 
tourism: Place matters. Tourism Geographies: 
An International Journal of Tourism Space, 
Place and Environment, 13(2), pp. 257-297.

Kennedy, K. & Dornan, D. (2009). An over-
view: Tourism non-governmental organiza-
tions and poverty reduction in developing 
countries. Asia Pacifi c Journal of Tourism 
Research, 14(2), pp. 183-200.

Lewis, D. (2007). Th e management of 
non-governmental development organiza-
tions. London/New York: Routledge.

Linke, U. (2012). Mobile imaginaries, portable 
signs: Global consumption and representa-
tions of slum life. Tourism Geographies: 
An International Journal of Tourism Space, 
Place and Environment, 14(2), pp. 294-319.

Little, W. E. (2004). Mayas in the marketplace: 
Tourism, globalization, and cultural identity. 
Austin: University of Texas Press.

Lyons, K. et al. (2012). Gap year volunteer 
tourism: Myths of global citizenship? Annals 
of Tourism Research, 39(1), pp. 361-378.

MacCannell, D. (1999). Th e tourist: A new 
theory of the leisure class. Berkeley/Los An-
geles/London: University of California Press.

Manzo, K. (2008). Imaging humanitarianism: 
NGO identity and the iconography of child-
hood. Antipode, 40(4), pp. 632-657.

McMichael, P.  (2004). Development and so-
cial change: A global perspective. Th ousand 
Oaks: Pine Forge Press.

Mostafanezhad, M. (2013a). Th e geography 
of compassion in volunteer tourism. Tour-

ism Geographies: An International Journal 
of Tourism Space, Place and Environment, 
15(2), pp. 318-337.

Mostafanezhad, M. (2013b). ‚Getting in touch 
with your inner Angelina”: Celebrity hu-
manitarianism and the cultural politics of 
gendered generosity in volunteer tourism. 
Th ird World Quarterly, 34(3), pp. 485-499.

O”Neill, K. L. & Th omas, K. (Eds.). (2011). 
Securing the city: Neoliberalism, space, and 
insecurity in postwar Guatemala. Durham/
London: Duke University Press.

Revue. (2013). Year 21., No. 12. La Antigua 
Guatemala.

Revue. (2013). Year 22., No. 1. La Antigua 
Guatemala.

Revue. (2013). Year 22., No.2. La Antigua 
Guatemala.

Rolfes, M. (2010). Poverty tourism: Th eoretical 
relfections and empirical fi ndings regarding 
an extraordinary form of tourism. GeoJour-
nal, 75, pp. 421-442.

Salamon, L. M. (1994). Th e rise of the nonprofi t 
sector. Foreign Aff airs, 73(4), pp. 109-122.

Salazar, N. B. (2004). „Developmental tour-
ists vs. development tourism: A case study.“ 
pp. 85-107 in Tourist behaviour: A psycho-
logical perspective, edited by Aparna Raj. 
New Delhi: Kanishka.

Sheller, M.  & Urry, J. (2004). Places to play, 
places in play. In: Sheller, M. & Urry, J. (Eds.), 
Tourism mobilities: Places to play, places in 
play (pp. 1-10). London: Routledge.

Simpson, K. (2004). ‚Doing development”: 
Th e gap year, volunteer-tourists and a pop-
ular practice of development. Journal of In-
ternational Development, 16, pp. 681-692.

Spencer, R. (2010). Development tourism: Les-
sons from Cuba. Farnham: Ashgate.

Steinbrink, M. (2012). ‚We did the slum!” - 
Urban poverty tourism in historical perspec-
tive. Tourism Geographies: An International 
Journal of Tourism Space, Place and Envi-
ronment, 14(2), pp. 213-234.

Tegelberg, M. (2013). Framing Maya cul-
ture: Tourism, representation and the case 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 12:55



242 Sarah Becklake / NGOs and the making of “development tourism destinations” 

of Quetzaltenango. Tourist Studies, 13(1), 
pp. 81-98.

Telfer, D. J.  & Sharpley, R. (2008). Tourism 
and development in the developing world. 
Abingdon/ New York: Routledge.

Th omas, K., O”Neill, K. L. & Offi  t, T. (2011). 
Securing the city: An introduction. In  
O”Neill, K.L. & Th omas, K. (Eds.), Securing 
the city: Neoliberalism, space, and insecurity 
in postwar Guatemala (pp.  1-21). Durham 
and London: Duke University Press.

Urry, J. 2002. Th e tourist gaze (2 ed.). London: Sage.
Wearing, S., McDonald, M.  & Ponting, J. 

(2005). Building a decommodifi ed research 

paradigm in tourism: Th e contribution of 
NGOs. Journal of Sustainable Tourism, 
13(5), pp. 424-439.

Whyte, K. P., Selinger, E.  & Outterson, K. 
(2011). Poverty tourism and the problem 
of consent. Journal of Global Ethics, 7(3), 
pp. 337-348.

Vodopivec, B.  & Jaff e, R. (2011). Save the 
world in a week: Volunteer tourism, devel-
opment and diff erence. European Journal of 
Development Research, 23(1), pp. 111-128.

Vrasti, W. (2013). Volunteer tourism in the 
global south. London/New York: Routledge.

Autorenvorstellung

Sarah Becklake is currently a PhD candidate in the Department of Sociology at Lancas-
ter University. Her research interests focus on the development politics and embodiment 
of global tourism destination competition, especially as played out in Guatemala and 
Latin America more broadly.
E.Mail: s.becklake@lancaster.ac.uk

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 12:55