rz_dg-mouton


ZfTW 2017; 9(1): 33-63 

Laurence Cole, Katharina Scharf* 
Alpine Tourism and ‘Masked 
Transformation’: Salzburg and Tyrol before 
1914 
DOI 10.1515/tw-2017-0003 

Abstract: The article undertakes a comparative analysis of tourism’s role in 
transformation processes in the Austrian crownlands of Salzburg and Tyrol from 
the mid-19th to the early 20th century. The authors outline the overall pattern of 
tourist development in the alpine region, before considering the impact of tour-
ism on the host societies in the two neighboring provinces. They argue that two 
features of the transformation process proved ambivalent. Firstly, the develop-
ment of tourism regions resulted from a process of negotiation and confronta-
tion between those favouring and those opposing tourist activities. Secondly, 
regional transformation took place in ‘masked form’ because, alongside the 
creation of tourist facilities and infrastructures, many features of ‘traditional’ 
society were maintained. In addition, the article suggests that a more precise 
understanding of the transformation process requires differentiation between 
‘adaptive transformation’ (the adjustment of existing enterprises and facilities 
to tourism) and ‘industrial transformation’ (the construction of dedicated areas 
of tourism-centered activity). 

Keywords: Alpine tourism regions, transformation process, masked 
transformation, tourist development, Salzburg and Tyrol, comparative analysis.  

Writing before the real advent of mass tourism in the Austrian Alps, the English 
travel writer Rachel Busk expressed in 1874 the sense of regret and simultane-
ous belief in progress that characterized much of the whole process of tourism: 
“It is quite true [...] that just in proportion as a country becomes better known, it 
loses, little by little, its merit of being picturesque. [...] But then these changes 
must be. The attempt to delay them is idle; nor would individual abstention 
from participating in the necessary movement of events have any sensible effect 

|| 
*Corresponding authors: Laurence Cole: University of Salzburg, History Department, Rudolfs-
kai 42, A-5020 Salzburg, Austria, E-Mail: laurence.cole@sbg.ac.at 
Katharina Scharf: University of Salzburg, History Department, Rudolfskai 42, A-5020 Salzburg, 
Austria, E-Mail: katharina.scharf@sbg.ac.at

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:24



34 | Laurence Cole, Katharina Scharf  

 

in stemming the even course of inevitable development” (Busk, 1874, pp. v-vii). 
Busk was an acute contemporary observer of the transformative effects of tour-
ism in Europe in the second half of the 19th century. As seemingly ‘untouched’ 
areas of the continent were sucked into this “course of inevitable development”, 
tourists themselves were aware of the transformative effects of their activities. 

 If the changes accompanying tourism clearly altered social and economic 
structures and regional landscapes, economic historians have generally been 
slow to analyze such transformations in detail, as Patrizia Battalani, Maria Cav-
alcanti, and Laurent Tissot have pointed out (Battalani, Cavalcanti, Tissot, in 
Leonardi & Heiss, 2003). Among historians of tourism in alpine regions, there is 
general agreement about the impact of tourism on local society through the 
creation of what Wolfgang Lipp has termed a “hub for encounters, experiences 
and exchanges of all kinds”. Lipp suggests that alpine regions have profited 
from the “give and take” of tourism, both economically and “metaphorically, in 
the sense of [...] the further development and modernization of their cultural 
form” (cited in Lauterbach, 2010, p. 1). Nevertheless, as Franz Mathis noted 
some time ago, the “majority of relevant research publications on the Alps [...] 
content themselves with the mere description of conditions, for example, to the 
effect that ‘tourism was a motor of modernization in certain regions’, but with-
out asking further how precisely this is to be explained” (Mathis, 1996, p. 61). 

 Despite a plethora of articles in the last two decades, there is still much to 
be discovered about these tourism-related changes for the alpine territories of 
the Habsburg Empire, or Austria-Hungary, as it was officially known after 1867 
(compare the contributions in Haas, Hoffmann & Luger, 1994; Bachleitner, 
1998; Luger, 2002). For example, there is still no tourism history of the Habs-
burg Monarchy as a whole, although one recent collection provides an im-
portant impulse in this direction (Stachel, 2010). Above all, detailed studies of 
regions or particular localities are few in number, the most extensive to date 
being Heidi Rogy's study of Carinthia, and works by Andrea Leonardi and Mau-
ro Grazioli on Levico and Arco respectively; Stadler’s cultural historical study of 
tourism in Salzburg offers extensive coverage of the topic from a chronological 
point of view and is based on a substantial number of sources. Türkis’ and 
Lässer’s overviews of tourist development in Innsbruck and Tyrol are full of 
valuable information for the period before 1914, although they concentrate 
mainly on the 20th century (Rogy, 2002; Leonardi, 1990; Grazioli, 1993; Türkis, 
2010; Lässer, 1989; Stadler, 1975). Moreover, with the notable exception of a 
volume by Andrea Leonardi and Hans Heiss, most work to date has concentrat-
ed on individual provinces within the Habsburg Monarchy, without adopting a 
comparative or ‘transregional’ perspective (Leonardi & Heiss, 2003; most recent-

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:24



 Alpine Tourism and ‘Masked Transformation’ | 35 

 

ly see also Dirninger, Hellmuth & Thuswaldner, 2015; Penz, 2005). The consid-
erable potential within such an approach has been shown for other fields of 
study on the Habsburg Monarchy, such as nationalism. For example, Pieter 
Judson’s 2006 study looked at the activities of nationalist activists across three 
different regions in the Austrian half of the Habsburg state (Bohemia, Tyrol and 
Styria), while devoting considerable attention to the ways in which nationalists 
sought to use the marketing and consumption of tourism to promote national 
identity in regions with disputed “language frontiers” (Judson, 2006, pp. 141–
76).  

Nevertheless, it remains an open question how best to define the term ‘re-
gion’ in conceptual and methodological terms (Stauber, 1994; Dopsch, 2011; 
Paasi, 2011). Without being able to go into this complex debate here, for the 
purposes of this article a pragmatic definition will be adopted, whereby the term 
will be understood flexibly in spatial terms (for more extensive conceptual dis-
cussion, compare the introduction to this special issue by Humair, Knoll, Tis-
sot). In short, the provinces of Salzburg and Tyrol can be seen as a distinctive 
touristic space within the Eastern Alps that transcended administrative bounda-
ries. While possessing specific social, economic, political and cultural charac-
teristics, owing to their diverging histories, the emphasis here is on transfor-
mation processes that were common to both provinces, thereby making 
Salzburg and Tyrol (along with overlapping territories such as the Salzkammer-
gut in Upper Austria / Styria) part of a larger ‘alpine tourism region’ in the west-
ern part of the Habsburg state. 

 Using such a framework, this article explores the role of tourism in trans-
formation processes in Salzburg and Tyrol from the mid-19th to the early 20th 
century from a comparative perspective. Today, these provinces are the two 
most important tourism destinations in Austria (Statistik Austria; Österreich 
Werbung). While the long-term transformative power of tourism in this alpine 
region seems beyond question, closer analysis is necessary with regard to what 
kind of transformation took place. In short, what exactly was transformed, and 
how, when and why? Locating the precise impact of tourism within a process of 
regional transformation is a complex task for two reasons. Firstly, tourism could 
be promoted intentionally, but also indirectly or, even, unintentionally (for 
example, when associations founded to preserve ‘traditional customs’ or re-
gional costumes became attractive for tourists). Secondly, from an analytical 
point of view, it is difficult to separate out specifically tourist-related causes of 
transformation from wider economic and structural changes. In practice, this 
means asking about the relationship between readily visible, quantifiable as-

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:24



36 | Laurence Cole, Katharina Scharf  

 

pects of tourist-related change and other social, economic and political devel-
opments.  

 One way to approach this problem is to start from Battalani's observation 
that, in addition to economic change, the emergence of tourism is always ac-
companied by cultural transformations (Battalani, 2001, p. 19). Jarkko Saarinen 
further suggests that tourist destinations are socially constructed, meaning that 
they are “produced and represented in a specific manner” (Saarinen, 2005, 
p. 165). Hence, it needs to be asked who or what constructed these destinations 
(Paasi, 2010). Where earlier tourism history focused more on construction from 
the outside, in the shape of travelers’ experiences and the much-quoted “tourist 
gaze” (Urry, 2002), more recent work emphasizes the need to look at protago-
nists of tourism as key agents in this process of creating and transforming tour-
ist destinations (Anderson, 2016; Keller, 2016).  

 Placing the experiences of the host societies at the forefront of discussion, 
this article sketches out the main pattern of tourist development in Salzburg 
and Tyrol before 1914. Overall, we wish to argue that the transformation process 
was ambivalent in two respects. Firstly, the creation and development of tour-
ism regions resulted from a process of negotiation and confrontation between 
those who favoured and others who opposed tourist activities. Secondly, re-
gional transformation was ambivalent in that, alongside visible markers of 
change (new roads, grand hotels, and so on), tourism transformation also took 
place in ‘masked form’. In other words, even as tourist facilities and infrastruc-
tures developed, many features and appearances of ‘traditional’ society were 
maintained. This is not to argue that alpine societies actually remained un-
changed, as some ethnographers or social anthropologists once assumed (for 
discussion see Viazzo, 1990, pp. 11–29), but that the process of transformation 
contained contradictory elements. Moreover, we suggest that a better under-
standing of the transformation process can be gained by differentiating between 
‘adaptive transformation’ – the adjustment and expansion of existing enterpris-
es and facilities to the tourist economy – and ‘industrial transformation’ – the 
creation of new, concentrated areas of dedicated, tourism-centered activity, in 
the sense described by Laurent Tissot as “Fordist” mass tourism (Tissot, 2011; 
see also Humair, Knoll and Tissot in this volume).  

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:24



 Alpine Tourism and ‘Masked Transformation’ | 37 

 

1 The Emergence of Alpine Tourism in Western 
Austria 

Salzburg and Tyrol possessed many common features in terms of geography, 
landscape and social and economic structures, with both provinces being char-
acterized by alpine terrain, agricultural small-holdings and small-scale artisan 
production, without the industrialization evident in nearby Switzerland. Salt-
mining represented a partial exception in the case of Salzburg, but this sector 
was in long-term decline, as was the traditional north-south transit trade in 
Tyrol. The major point of difference from a geographical and environmental 
point of view lay in the milder climate in the southern parts of Tyrol, below the 
Brenner Pass. At the same time, there were important cultural and political 
differences, connected mainly to the fact that Tyrol had become a Habsburg 
possession in 1363, with Italian-speaking territories being accrued in the subse-
quent centuries. Tyrol was thus a multi-lingual region, in which the German 
population formed roughly 57% out of a population of 950,000 in 1910, as 
against 42% Italian-speaking in Italian-Tyrol (unofficially known as Trentino) 
and l% Ladin-speaking (Cole, 2000, p. 24). Salzburg, by contrast, had only been 
fully integrated into the Habsburg Monarchy in 1816, after the former prince-
bishopric had been dissolved in 1803, before experiencing changing rule in the 
Napoleonic era under the former Grand Duke of Tuscany, Austria, France and 
Bavaria. In confessional terms, both provinces were almost entirely Roman 
Catholic, with the Archdiocese of Salzburg exercising ecclesiastical authority 
over the entire region. 

In general terms, the emergence of tourism in both provinces followed a 
pattern similar to that of other eastern alpine regions:  
a)  A first phase in the late 18th and early 19th century, in which Enlightened 

scientific interest in the geology and ethnography of the mountain world 
combined with the latter days of the Grand Tour to establish an initial basis 
for travel in the Alps (Scharfe, 2007). Alpine regions came to be seen as 
worth visiting and were described and advertised in topographies and 
guidebooks, which provided the educated bourgeoisie with informative 
overviews of the respective provinces (Hübner, 1794; Vierthaler, 1799; Roh-
rer, 1796).  

b)  In the first years of the 19th century, a second phase of Romanticist-
influenced travelling signaled the advent of modern tourism. In Salzburg, 
these Romantics idealized the idyllic scenery surrounding the provincial 
capital and tourism began to emerge, but limited mainly to the town of 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:24



38 | Laurence Cole, Katharina Scharf  

 

Salzburg and a few outlying centres such as Bad Gastein and Zell am See. 
Further outlying mountain regions, such as the upland plain of Lungau, 
were at first barely affected by tourism. In Tyrol, nascent alpine tourism 
grew along the Inn and Etsch valleys, spreading outwards into side-valleys 
away from the main transit route. A notable feature of early touristic repre-
sentations of Tyrol was the idea of the province as a ‘second Switzerland’, 
deriving from comparisons made by British and German travelers with the 
scenery in Switzerland and from the transnational reception of the Tyrolean 
uprising of 1809 against the French and Bavarians. Hailed by William 
Wordsworth as Wilhelm “Tell’s great Spirit, from the dead returned”, An-
dreas Hofer, the leader of the uprising was hailed as a ‘national hero’ by the 
educated public in Britain and Germany after 1815 (Cole, 2009). This created 
considerable interest in the area, in a way similar to the ‘discovery’ of the 
composer Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart for tourist purposes in Salzburg 
(Hoffmann, 2005, pp. 277–281; Schmidt, 1990, pp. 51f). 

c)  From the 1850s–60s onwards, there developed a third phase of ‘sporting 
alpinism’, which witnessed the founding of numerous local alpine associa-
tions, following the foundation of the Austrian Alpine Association in 1862, 
its German equivalent in 1869, and the gradual merger of the two groups in 
1873/74 (Amstädter, 1996; Günther, 1998; Gidl, 2007; Keller, 2016). This 
phase formed part of a European trend of the ‘alpinization’ of tourism, 
whereby Switzerland acted as a role model, notably for the western prov-
inces of the Habsburg Monarchy (Tissot, 2011). On the one hand, as the 19th 
century progressed, tourists built upon and spread the great enthusiasm 
about Switzerland shown by the travelling writers and scientists of the late 
Enlightenment. On the other hand, tourism promotors in Salzburg and Ty-
rol, who were seeking to expand the sector in their own region, viewed 
Switzerland with a mixture of jealousy and anxiety, pointing to Switzerland 
both as a role model to emulate and as a rival in a competitive market (Tis-
sot, 2011; Böning, 2005). 

d)  In the 1870s, the move to large-scale tourism accelerated, accompanied by 
extensive infrastructural development. Scholars generally agree that rail-
way connections were a prerequisite for enabling large-scale tourist arri-
vals, as well as facilitating greater awareness of tourism’s economic poten-
tial (Heiss, 2001). The arrival of the western railway to Salzburg (from 
Vienna) in 1860 enabled the take-off of tourism, as the town became an at-
traction both in its own right and as a point of departure for visits to the sur-
rounding area. In Tyrol, completion of the vital rail link over the Brenner 
Pass in 1867 had an equivalent function in transforming the number of tour-

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:24



 Alpine Tourism and ‘Masked Transformation’ | 39 

 

ist visits. Rail links between the two provinces of Salzburg and Tyrol were 
established in 1875. 

By 1914, tourist numbers reached new peaks, with Tyrol in the forefront of de-
velopments in the tourist sector in the Habsburg Monarchy. The pioneering 
town for Tyrolean tourism was Meran, which as early as the 1830s–40s had 
established a reputation for the beneficial effects of its mild and dry climate. In 
1871, Thomas Cook began to include Tyrol in his organized tours to the Rhine 
and Switzerland, and these trips soon became well established (Ring 2000, 
p. 109). Towards the end of the century, the development of Kitzbühel as a win-
ter resort revealed the potential of all-year round tourism, with the province’s 
skiing and winter sport clubs belonging to the first of their kind in Europe, after 
Switzerland and Great Britain (Steinegger, 1976). In the Italian-speaking south 
of the province (Trentino), the spa towns of Levico and Arco played a leading 
role, along with Madonna di Campiglio as a mountain resort. In 1889/90, inter-
ested professionals in the towns of Innsbruck and Bozen formed the Provincial 
Association for Tourism in Tyrol, the first of its kind at the provincial level in 
Austria-Hungary. By 1913, the Statistical Central Commission for the Austrian 
half of the Habsburg Monarchy recorded around 400 designated tourist resorts 
in Tyrol, with just over 2,000 enterprises (from grand hotels to guest-houses) 
offering accommodation with over 65,000 bed-spaces, of which approximately 
two-thirds were in hotels and one-third in private accommodation, a category 
including rooms in private residences and farm-houses (Leonardi, 2003, 
pp. 253–256). In Salzburg, the most significant tourism centres in the 19th centu-
ry were the provincial capital itself, Zell am See, St. Johann im Pongau and Bad 
Gastein (Stadler, 1975, p. 255). The number of visitors to the province of Salzburg 
increased rapidly by the end of the century, leaping from about 100,000 in 1896 
to 150,000 only four years later. The city of Salzburg comprised more than fifty 
percent of the total tourist flows into the country, but the proportion of the rest 
of the province grew constantly (Salzburger Landtag, Landesverband für Frem-
denverkehr, 1901). 

The symbiotic nature of tourist development across the region was illustrat-
ed by the way in which Tyrol functioned as a role model for its neighbor. Tour-
ism supporters in Salzburg never tired of referring to Tyrol's impressive progress 
and the economic advantages that came with it. Yet, they also strove to compete 
with Tyrol and this fostered the proliferation of hotels and inns, as well as calls 
for expansion of the local railway network. In particular, numerous kinds of 
improvement and tourism associations (Verschönerungsvereine, Fremdenver-
kehrsvereine) formed the basis for the active promotion of tourism, spreading 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:24



40 | Laurence Cole, Katharina Scharf  

 

throughout the province. The Salzburg Provincial Association for Tourism was 
founded in 1896, and formal cooperation with its equivalents in Tyrol and Vor-
arlberg began in 1905/06. In order to improve communication about “questions 
of general interest for tourism”, the three associations began publishing a joint 
periodical, whose first number appeared in April 1906. A month later, its scope 
was widened to include Liechtenstein, from when on it appeared as the Mittei-
lungen der Landesverbände für Fremdenverkehr in Tirol, Salzburg, Vorarlberg und 
Liechtenstein.  

2 Alpine Tourism and Socio-Cultural 
Transformation 

By means of looking at what kind of socio-cultural transformations accompa-
nied the emergence of a tourism sector in the economy, two areas will be ana-
lyzed: firstly, the process of negotiation and contestation around tourism, which 
involved political confrontation on the one hand and clashes of interest be-
tween urban and rural areas on the other hand; secondly, the question of infra-
structural change, social relations and cultural images within tourism.  

2.1 Promoting and Contesting Tourism 

Within the province (Land) of Salzburg, the contested beginnings of tourism 
were bound up with the fact that its promotion emanated mainly from the pro-
vincial capital – the city of Salzburg. An Association for the Advancement of 
Tourism in Salzburg (Verein zur Hebung des Fremdenverkehrs in Salzburg) was 
founded in 1887 with the purpose of encouraging tourism in the city, yet its 
leading members argued that tourism could also be economically beneficial for 
the countryside, especially Salzburg’s hinterland. The association regarded the 
town as the central node for communication with the surrounding area and the 
mountain districts (known as Gaue): Salzburg was “the gateway (Einbruch-
station), from which the visitors dispersed all over the country, into the most 
outlying alpine valleys” (Salzburger Landtag, Verein zur Hebung des Fremden-
verkehrs, 1904). In similar fashion, members of the urban bourgeoisie in the 
southern part of German-speaking Tyrol took the initiative in forming organiza-
tions to promote tourism. A key motivation here was the decline in the transit 
trade and the Bozen markets. According to official records, the oldest Ver-
schönerungsverein in Tyrol was established in Bruneck in the Puster valley in 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:24



 Alpine Tourism and ‘Masked Transformation’ | 41 

 

1874, although it had seemingly been active since the late 1860s already. Other 
associations soon followed, including in places such as Hall in north Tyrol 
(founded in 1870, but not officially registered until 1884), and many soon gath-
ered substantial support. In Innsbruck, for example, commercial agent Alois 
Schrott was the driving force behind the town’s Improvement Association, 
which gathered 304 members to its constituent meeting in 1880 (Türkis, 2010, 
pp. 16–17).  

 The drive to form tourism associations at a provincial level came principally 
from this same milieu, with town-based promotors thereby laying claim to in-
fluence developments throughout the countryside too (Heiss, 2001). In Tyrol, for 
example, Johann Angerer, secretary of Bozen chamber of commerce and mem-
ber of the Austrian parliament, reported in 1880 that tourism had brought in 
over 2 million florins to the district under its purview, and such figures im-
pressed upon his colleagues the sector’s considerable potential (Türkis, 2010, 
p. 17). However, it was the participation of a small Tyrolean delegation at the 
first Conference for the Promotion of Tourism in the Austrian Alpine Provinces, 
held in Graz in 1884, which convinced pro-tourism groups that a more effective 
coordination of their activities was desirable. Editor and publicist Franz Pita 
from the Innsbruck Verschönerungsverein observed that, in terms of tourists 
from within Austrian-Hungary, Tyrol was facing ‘notable competition’ from 
Styria and he started lobbying for more concerted action. When concerns were 
raised over the next few years that accommodation capacity in Innsbruck was 
no longer sufficient and tourists were therefore discouraged from coming to the 
town, the necessary final push towards firmer organization occurred. In short 
succession, the Deutsch-Süd- und Osttiroler Fremdenverkehrsverein was founded 
in Brixen in January 1889, and the Verein zur Hebung des Fremdenverkehrs in 
Nordtirol a few months later in April; in January 1890, the two groups north and 
south of the Brenner pass fused together to form the Landesverein der vereinig-
ten Kur- und Fremdenverkehrsvereine in Tirol (Lässer, 1989, pp. 37–52).  

Through these initiatives from civil society, networks of improvement and 
tourist associations spread across the regions of Salzburg and Tyrol in the last 
two decades of the 19th century (for a list of such foundations in Tyrol, see 
Lässer, 1989, pp. 19–24). As the statutes of numerous associations from Salz-
burg province indicate, the improvement associations included a series of tasks 
for the “beautification” of their localities. These ranged from the “building, 
improvement and preservation of pavements, the planting of trees, the installa-
tion of benches for resting on, signposts and the like” (Statuten des 
Verschönerungs-Vereins in Lofer, 1883) to the “promotion of scenic attractions, 
the advertisement of accommodation and summer apartments through lists, the 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:24



42 | Laurence Cole, Katharina Scharf  

 

support of winter sports” (Statuten des Verschönerungsvereines Golling, 1908) 
and the “organization of festivities on patriotic commemoration days” (Statuten 
des St. Gilgener Fremden-Vereines, 1882). In sum, suggested St. Gilgen's tour-
ism association, “as far as possible, all obstacles should be eliminated, which 
are disadvantageous for the arrival and stay of tourists and newcomers and of 
the village's reputation” (Statuten des St.Gilgener Fremden-Vereines, 1882). Or, 
as the equivalent group in Lofer affirmed: “The association's purpose is to en-
sure all these kinds of improvements and comforts in our town, so as to make it 
a comfortable and popular summer place of residence” (Statuten des 
Verschönerungs-Vereines in Lofer, 1883).  

 In practice, however, these tasks were by no means straightforward, be-
cause clashes of interest often occurred between groups actively encouraging 
tourism (the commercial bourgeoisie, the Christian Social party and lower cler-
gy, and inn-keepers, communal leaders and peasants in the localities) and 
those against it (Catholic-Conservatives and the upper clergy, some sections of 
the agricultural population, state civil servants and conservationist groups). 
Two examples illustrate the nature of the conflictual situations that arose, the 
first being religious and ideological, taken from Tyrol, and the second being 
political and financial, coming from Salzburg. Common to both conflicts was a 
familiar 19th century discourse about ‘progress’ and ‘modernity’. A crucial factor 
here was the fact that many of the entrepreneurial protagonists involved were 
members of local councils, provincial assemblies or the Austrian parliament. 
Alongside their professional work in chambers of commerce or voluntary mem-
bership of tourism associations, they were able to lobby actively in favour of 
tourism and to put pressure on policy makers at different levels. If the number 
and characteristics of these historical actors were crucial for tourism’s break-
through, their prominence also meant that political disputes could ensue. 

While the southern Tyrolean spa town of Meran had been drawing visitors 
since the 1830s, the numbers involved were still relatively modest around mid-
century (amounting to 350 in 1850), and the presence of German and English 
guests was tolerated by the provincial authorities (Lässer, 1989, p. 34). Numbers 
started to increase more quickly in the next decades (reaching 3,270 by 1874), 
but what really turned tourism into an ideologically controversial issue was the 
Austrian Kulturkampf in the 1860s–1870s. Much as in Germany, the conflict 
revolved around the place of religion in public life and the Catholic Church's 
relationship to the state, especially with regard to education and justice. In 
Austria, the signing of a Concordat with Rome in 1855 heightened the stakes in 
this dispute, which raged with particular vehemence in Tyrol. 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:24



 Alpine Tourism and ‘Masked Transformation’ | 43 

 

In short, having authorized the expulsion of Protestants from the Ziller val-
ley as late as 1837, the Catholic-Conservative elites in the Tyrolean provincial 
assembly (Landtag) resolved to maintain the ‘religious unity’ of the province by 
blocking the foundation of Protestant parishes (Cole, 2003). Yet, pressure to 
build Protestant places of worship in Meran and Innsbruck derived from the 
need to cater to visitors from northern Europe, notably after the visiting King 
Friedrich Wilhelm IV of Prussia had organized a private Protestant service at 
Castle Rottenstein outside Meran (Das Kurhaus, 1999, p. 21). The issuing of a 
government decree on 8th April 1861 – the so-called Protestantenpatent – brought 
matters to a head because it permitted the formation of Protestant communities 
in Tyrol. The Catholic-Conservative hierarchy and their newspaper mouthpiece, 
the Tiroler Stimmen, stirred up agitation throughout the spring and summer of 
1861, warning of the dangers of Protestant influence should the free flow of 
tourist traffic be permitted without restriction (Tiroler Stimmen, 11.4.1861). On-
going agitation and alarmist reports created such a negative atmosphere that 
one newspaper in the neighboring province of Vorarlberg reported receiving 
several enquiries as to whether it was safe for Protestants to visit the area for the 
forthcoming autumn and winter season without having to endure insults and 
other unpleasant behaviour (Feldkircher Zeitung, 24.8.1861). 

While numerous factors played a role in the Tyrolean Kulturkampf, includ-
ing the ongoing tensions in the German Confederation that culminated in Aus-
tria's war against Prussia and Italy in 1866, the fear of ‘pernicious’ outside 
Protestant influence through tourism was a constant theme of Catholic-
Conservative discourse throughout the 1860s–1870s. The founding of the Ger-
man Alpine Association in 1869 heightened these fears, and provided a new 
target for criticism. In 1876, for example, anti-tourism campaigners renewed 
their attacks against Alpinists. The Catholic-Conservative paper criticized the 
German and Austrian Alpine Association's decision to lay a plaque on the 
Großglockner mountain for co-founder Karl Hoffmann, who had died at the 
Battle of Sedan during the Franco-Prussian War of 1870–71. In August 1876, the 
paper invoked the “sons of Austria” who had recently died by Prussian hand in 
the 1866 war, and the following month it further railed against association 
members' seeming disregard for religious holidays, as well as their scientific 
endeavours, given that science was a “word that has caused much mischief” 
(cited in Keller, 2016, p. 58). The very same year, however, a central government 
decision formally confirmed the constitutional toleration of non-Catholic con-
fessions in Tyrol. In Meran itself, a prayer-house for Protestants was established 
in 1862, but guidebooks still warned about taking prayer-books outside in pub-
lic or seeking to advertise one's confession. Only after a Protestant church was 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:24



44 | Laurence Cole, Katharina Scharf  

 

consecrated in 1885, did the situation slowly start to “normalize” (Benischek, 
2002, pp. 179–184).  

 These conflicts in Tyrol indicated that a town-country divide underlay some 
of the disputes over tourism, and the example of financial subsidies in Salzburg 
illustrates a different dimension to this debate. All proponents of tourism 
sought money for various projects and usually invoked the urgent necessity of 
“enhancing tourism” to do so. In 1897, Ludwig Zeller, member of a well-known 
entrepreneurial family and director of the Salzburg Provincial Tourism Associa-
tion, pointed out that a “mass of thousands and thousands” of tourists would 
now “visit and inhabit all areas in the province”, meaning that the small coun-
try of Salzburg had to be as successful as its neighbor Tyrol and the alpine 
“Eldorado”, Switzerland (Salzburger Landtag, Zeller, Februar 1898). According-
ly, the association needed to extend its efforts across the whole country, making 
use of the annual subsidy it received from the Salzburg Landtag. In this way, so 
the association’s members hoped, “the tourists' money” would “percolate 
through many veins into all levels of working society” (Salzburger Landtag, 
Petitionsausschuss, 1898). Yet, the challenge here was not just competing with 
its neighbours, but in bridging gaps between the city of Salzburg and the coun-
tryside. 

 Rural-urban tensions between the city and the mountain areas repeatedly 
surfaced in debates on tourism in the provincial assembly. Rudolf Spängler, a 
Landtag deputy from a renowned family of merchants and bankers, complained 
about the situation in 1872: “Unfortunately, the dispute between the city and 
the countryside erupts every year. But, what would the wee country (Ländchen) 
be without the capital city? Indeed, the city takes advantage of the hinterland, 
but the hinterland gains much greater advantages from the capital” (Salzburger 
Volksblatt, 11.12.1872). Promotion of tourism thus involved a process of negotia-
tion and confrontation between the city and mountain districts, such as the 
Lungau, on the country's southern border to Styria. By the end of the 19th centu-
ry, for example, the Lungau had only partially profited from railway connec-
tions and local politicians repeatedly brought up the “step-motherly” treatment 
of the Lungau during Landtag debates. The gist of the complaints was that not 
enough was being done to overcome its peripheral geographic location far from 
the provincial capital by improving rail links, installing telephone lines, extend-
ing the postal network, and providing subsidies. Moreover, this lack of invest-
ment meant that the natural climatic advantages of the area, which was also 
known as “Salzburg's Siberia”, were not being fully exploited, because poor 
transport connections limited the development of winter tourism. In this re-
spect, the internal political dynamics within the province worked against 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:24



 Alpine Tourism and ‘Masked Transformation’ | 45 

 

Lungau before 1914, with some tourism agents even trying to establish the city 
of Salzburg as an international winter sports resort. Their chief argument was 
the superior infrastructure in the capital city, whereas the mountain regions 
only disposed of a few hotels of poor quality. Eventually, of course, winter tour-
ism outside the city did become a success story, but not until the second half of 
the 20th century.  

 At the same time, ideological dimensions underlay these financial issues, 
which linked back to religious-based concerns about the material and moral 
consequences of tourism for the local population. In January 1895, for example, 
the Tyrolean Landtag rejected a subsidy request from the Provincial Tourism 
Association, with the leading speaker against the idea being a priest, who evi-
dently reflected clerical fears that, instead of toiling in field and stall, peasants 
might gain an easy source of income through letting out rooms to tourists or 
acting as mountain-guides. These sentiments certainly animated the Benedic-
tine abbot of Marienberg, Leo Treuinfels, in another Landtag debate about sub-
sidies in February 1897, when he thundered that such supplementary income 
was “no sooner gained than wasted away” (cited in Lässer, 1989, p. 75). Pastoral 
care reports (Seelsorgeberichte) from Salzburg voiced similar worries about the 
potentially negative effects of tourism, as the priest from the village of Hof 
wrote: “Everywhere tourism has – albeit in disguise – a negative and destruc-
tive impact on morality and religious faith” (cited in Hanisch, 1985, p. 832). In 
1875, a writer from Unken had already warned that the tourists brought “little 
good, but plenty of bad” (Salzburger Chronik, 23.10.1875, p. 2), and a quarter of a 
century later such suspicions had not dissipated entirely among political Catho-
lics. In Tyrol, the clash of viewpoints over materialism and consumption took on 
extra symbolic significance when it came to the planning of the centenary cele-
bration of the above-mentioned 1809 uprising. Conservatives wanted to hold the 
event on the religious feast-day of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary, the 15th 
August, when Andreas Hofer had ridden in triumph into town after a third victo-
ry against the Franco-Bavarians on the Berg Isel outside Innsbruck. Pressure by 
the younger generation of political Catholics – the Christian Socials – forced a 
switch to the end of August 1909, partly due to considerations about harvest-
time. However, another key factor was tourism, as the organizers were concerned 
that fewer peasants would attend if they thereby missed out on tourist income in 
the middle of a key holiday month (Cole, 2000, pp. 401–403).  

These examples show how concern for ‘traditional morals’ remained a key 
issue in tourist regions, although it would be misleading to imply that the clergy 
as a group was wholly against tourism. After all, one of the most well-known 
early promoters of tourism and a co-founder of the German Alpine Association 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:24



46 | Laurence Cole, Katharina Scharf  

 

was Franz Senn, priest in Vent in the Ötz valley (and later in Neustift in Stubai 
valley). Senn was not only active in undertaking mountain-climbing, but in 
providing facilities through the reconstruction of his curate's house in the early 
1860s: “By extending and renovating the old [building], I got 6 decent rooms 
with 2 parlours. Since then, something was repaired or built every year, so that 
it now disposes of 11 rooms alongside both parlours, and there are 30 guest-beds 
for tourists” (cited in Oberwalder et al., 2004, p. 128; see also Anderson, 2016). 
Senn was a striking example of a new generation of clergymen, who fa-
voured active engagement with the economic problems facing the peasant-
ry rather than focusing purely on doctrinal questions. In other words, tour-
ism formed a dividing line in the internal debates within political 
Catholicism that saw the Christian Social movement opening up to the 
practical benefits of tourism. Crucially, however, they did so by asserting a 
firm moral framework within which tourism could be accepted. One article 
in the Salzburger Chronik praised the novel Die Fremden (“The Foreigners”) 
by the Tyrolean conservative author Karl Domanig, suggesting that Salz-
burg’s Landtag should re-print the book and distribute it for free, because 
of the relevance of its message: “[ ... ] keep your inborn faith [ ... ] hold fast 
to the beliefs your Catholic parents gave you, then tourism won't harm you 
and you can avail yourself of the advantages of tourism [ ... ]” (Salzburger 
Chronik, 25.6.1898, p. 1f). 

Such caution indicates that tourist transformation was an ambivalent 
process in alpine regions before 1914. The debates surrounding the devel-
opment of tourism in the last third of the 19th century underline that there 
was not necessarily anything automatic about its ‘triumph’. Contemporar-
ies debated what form tourism promotion should take and which areas 
should be developed, with both of these questions giving rise to political 
disputes. At the same time, as well as political backing, regional transfor-
mation through tourism clearly depended on infrastructural prerequisites, 
and the implications of these changes also contained contradictory ele-
ments. 

2.2 ‘Adaptive’ Transformation to Tourism and ‘Industrial’ 
Tourism 

The expansion of tourism began to make general socio-economic changes 
more visible and to alter the structure of the regional economy, which be-
gan a slow transformation from agricultural to service-dominated sectors, 
thus ‘leap-frogging’ industrialization (Meixner, 1992). In analyzing this 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:24



 Alpine Tourism and ‘Masked Transformation’ | 47 

 

process, it is necessary to distinguish more closely between ‘adaptive’ 
transformation to tourism and ‘industrial tourism’ in the sense outlined 
above. Not unlike Tyrol, Salzburg's involvement in regional transformation 
through tourism had its roots in its location as a transit land – less so in 
terms of the commercial markets that prospered in early modern southern 
Tyrol, but more in terms of tradespeople and pilgrims, which reflected the 
role of the Archbishopric of Salzburg as an ecclesiastical conduit between 
the Holy Roman Empire and the Papacy (Stadler, 1975). 

Hence, small enterprises benefitted from existing trade and communi-
cation routes so as to evolve into guest-houses or even proper hotels 
(Hellmuth, 1994). One well-known inn at Bruck in the Pinzgau, bearing the 
catchy name Lukashansl, had long been in the possession of the Mayr fami-
ly. Under Johann Mayr, a member of the Austrian Tourist Club, head of the 
local council, and Landtag deputy for the curia of large landowners, the 
business prospered as it adapted to the new opportunities tourism pre-
sented. Alongside the original Lukashansl, Mayr also ran a second property 
under the same name at Ferleiten between 1877 and 1920. In addition, he 
owned the Rainer hut in the Kaprun valley until 1894, and in 1890 he built 
the mountain lodge Trauneralm in the Fusch valley. In order to encourage 
business at his guest-house in Ferleiten, Mayr applied for a license for a 
narrow gauge electric railway to the Tauernalm and he argued for invest-
ments in adequate roads (Illustrierte Rundschau, 10.7.1901, p. 11; Salz-
burger Volksblatt, 16.06.1894, p. 17; Dillinger´s Reise- und Fremden-
Zeitung, 10.06.1897, p. 7 and 20.08.1899, p. 6; Voithofer, 2011, p. 86). 

Careful adjustment of existing businesses to new demands meant that 
the pace of transformation might be long drawn out, as is suggested by the 
Gasthaus Elephant in Brixen. This tavern initially prospered as a hostelry 
serving the transit trade, before becoming an elegant guesthouse playing 
host to aristocrats on their Grand Tour. As the 19th century proceeded, it 
became a modern hotel offering fine cuisine and up-to-date comforts. In-
heritance settlements and astute marriage agreements kept the guesthouse 
in continuous family possession from 1773 onwards, but crucially, it was 
the enterprise's diverse economic base that allowed it to stay in business. 
As associational life developed in Austria from the 1860s onwards, the 
guest-house became an important meeting-place for local civil society. At 
the same time, guest-house owner Joseph Mayr bought agricultural land 
and took on official duties, having successfully become the town's post-
master in 1837. This ensured that coach relays passed through the inn, 
while the agricultural landholdings covered a considerable part of the 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:24



48 | Laurence Cole, Katharina Scharf  

 

guest-house's needs as regards food and fuel (these holdings were only 
sold in the 20th century, when the Gasthaus Elephant became a solely ser-
vice-providing institution). By 1914, with tourist arrivals in Brixen at 13,074 
compared to 2,547 in 1898, the long-term transformation of the business 
was affirmed, as signaled by the building of a garage to cater to ‘auto-
mobilists’ in 1906 (Heiss, 2002, pp. 49–112). 

This example from Brixen suggests that much of tourism-based trans-
formation occurred through adaptation and within an established frame-
work of small-scale family enterprises, which long continued to play a 
central role in the sector. Moreover, as Andrea Leonardi has argued, it was 
not just modern infrastructure that formed a prerequisite for touristic de-
velopment, but a pre-existing “culture of hospitality” (Leonardi, 2006). In 
this sense, long-term continuities enabled the small-town environments 
in which touristic transformation took place to act as conduits of ‘modern-
isation’ in alpine regions. On the one hand, small-town urban spaces me-
diated between visitors from ‘big-city’ conglomerations and the mountain 
countryside. On the other hand, they experienced on a small scale the 
process of urbanization happening more rapidly elsewhere, in terms of 
population growth, expansion of infrastructure and administration, and 
differentiation in the social structure as wage-earners migrated into tour-
ism centres to work in the service sector. For example, Meran's resident 
population grew from 4,229 in 1869 to 11,618 in 1910, and that of the Salz-
burg spa Bad Gastein from 922 to 2,350 over the same period (Heiss, 2001).  

However, given the state of current research, it is difficult to evaluate 
how far such developments fundamentally altered social and gender rela-
tions. Certainly, employment in the tourist sector increased the mobility of 
the working population. Second only to the building trade among non-
agricultural occupations, it was particularly important for the female 
population, accounting for 40% of all paid female workers. Many women 
gained a degree of ‘economic emancipation’ through independent wage-
earning, while a few established themselves successfully as hoteliers or 
inn-keepers (Heiss, 2000; Bedin, 2016, pp. 222f). Nevertheless, much of this 
activity took place in small-scale businesses where a familiar patriarchal 
structure remained.  

In the countryside, tourism was initially grafted onto existing occupational 
structures. In other words, tourism provided a much-needed additional source 
of income in a hard-pressed economy which had always relied on secondary 
occupations, particularly as many of the minor trades, such as tool- or clothes-
making declined. Even though agriculture in Salzburg and Tyrol benefited from 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:24



 Alpine Tourism and ‘Masked Transformation’ | 49 

 

the second agricultural revolution in the late 19th-century, most farms were of 
the small, self-providing variety and the main social and cultural structures in 
the villages remained almost constant. In the Wipp valley in southern Tyrol, for 
example, the farm run by Maria and Alois R. ensured a reasonably comfortable 
living, but extra income from summer vacationers (Sommerfrischler) provided a 
welcome boost of 120 crowns in 1913, compared to the 50 earned for renting out 
their horse (Strauß, 2015). From this point of view, tourism offered new possibil-
ities to diversify their living, mainly on a seasonal basis, and thereby contribut-
ed to a partial “re-agrarianization” (Haas, 1994, pp. 11–14). In other words, tour-
ism ensured the means to stay on the farm, thereby slowing the flight from the 
land, but change was not yet on a scale to enable full conversion to the business 
of accommodating visitors. More research is certainly needed in this area, but it 
can provisionally be suggested that the persistence of small-scale enterprises, 
patriarchal social relations, and the role of tourism as a provider of supplemen-
tary income within a still predominantly rural economy limited or ‘disguised’ 
the nature of transformation taking place on a regional level before 1914.  

Alongside – and emerging from – this ‘adaptive transformation’, ‘in-
dustrial transformation’ occurred in certain locations defined by new, modern 
infrastructures and a primary concentration on the tourist economy. Together 
with railways, new roads, cable-cars and mountain refuges, the grand hotels 
symbolized this change most visibly, often rising up in the vicinity of urban rail 
stations. The Hotel de l’Europe, Hotel Victoria and Hotel Tyrol in Innsbruck, as 
well as the equivalent grand hotels in the town of Salzburg such as Hotel de 
l’Europe, Hotel d’Autriche and Hôtel Bristol, or in Zell am See, the Hotel am See, 
boasted the kind of facilities – running hot water, en-suite bathrooms, electric 
light, telephone lines and heating – that older guest-houses did not have. For 
example, after the earlier concerns about bed-spaces, new construction helped 
to treble the number of rooms available in Innsbruck between 1890 and 1909 
and the number of registered tourists in the town increased from around 50,000 
in 1890 to 200,000 in 1914 (Türkis, 2010, pp. 15–18). Expansion of accommoda-
tion capacity placed new demands on the municipal infrastructure, which 
meant that tourism centres often anticipated or accelerated improvements to 
sanitation or power supplies. For example, the local council and Verschöne-
rungsverein in St. Gilgen on Lake Wolfgang in Salzburg initiated canalization 
and a water pipe in the town, arguing: “the new water pipe will result in an 
increasing number of foreigners. A Sommerfrische and health resort needs to 
guarantee water of drinkable quality for all the guests” (Salzburger Landtag, 
September/Oktober 1903). In southern Tyrol, a joint enterprise between Bozen 
and Meran led to the construction of a hydro-electric power plant on the Etsch 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:24



50 | Laurence Cole, Katharina Scharf  

 

river, which went into operation in 1898. Reputedly creating the first high-
tension cable in the world to transmit 10,000 volts, the power station trans-
formed the range of possibilities for further improving infrastructure. It enabled, 
for example, the supply of power to the funicular railway between Bozen and 
Ritten in 1907 (Heiss, 2001).  

 Intensification of transport links had a symbiotic effect in creating concen-
trations of tourist activity. While many roads in the alpine region were based on 
the old trading routes, demand for completely new stretches typically came 
from tourism entrepreneurs. In Salzburg, one famous route replaced a badly 
maintained track that Emperor Franz Joseph I. had travelled on in 1893. When 
completed, the new Kaiser-Franz-Josef-Straße attracted great praise: “It is the 
beginning of a mountain road, such as has been created for the first time in 
Salzburg and today there are no longer any doubts about its importance for 
tourism” (Salzburger Landtag, Zeller, Jänner 1896). In 1910, the road was broad-
ened in places for cars. Moreover, it was closed to agricultural vehicles in the 
summer, in order to guarantee unobstructed access for cars and omnibuses. As 
Landtag deputies in favour of the project reasoned, “if we want to increase tour-
ism in Salzburg, first and foremost it is necessary to construct the finest roads 
for the most beautiful valleys, for the pearls of the country” (Salzburger Land-
tag, Eberhart, November 1910).  

While business interests in south Tyrol always took account of the im-
portance of the railways for normal goods traffic, they lobbied hard in favor of 
new connections because tourism “constitutes a very substantial source of in-
come that cannot be replaced by anything else” (Statistischer Bericht, 1894, 
p. 443). In practice, however, support from the Austrian government proved 
hard to come by in the 1890s and 1900s, with Minister-President Count Taaffe 
telling the above mentioned Johann Angerer that tourism was essentially the 
business of inn-keepers and was not a matter for the state (Kofler, 1951, p. 313). 
Hence, most transport connections resulted from private finance or contribu-
tions from municipal and provincial institutions, which meant that progress 
was slower than many wished for, despite the clear boost they gave to increas-
ing tourist numbers. This was the case with the Meran-Bozen railway opened in 
1881, the Lake Achen funicular and narrow-gauge railway opened in 1889 (the 
first of its kind in Tyrol), and the narrow-gauge track from Jenbach into the 
Ziller valley in 1900. When entrepreneur Josef Riehl opened his mountain cable-
rail link from Innsbruck to the Hungerburg in September 1906, he also had to 
overcome initial disinterest from the town council; but a total of 155,197 paying 
customers in the first year soon proved the doubters wrong (Türkis, 2010, pp. 19- 
23).  

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:24



 Alpine Tourism and ‘Masked Transformation’ | 51 

 

 In sum, through a combination of policies by tourist pressure groups and 
infrastructural improvements, specific locations were transformed into centers 
of ‘industrial tourism’, by specialising in this sector of the economy. Spa towns 
such as Meran and Arco illustrate the point in terms of their administrative or-
ganization and the construction of medicinal and therapeutic facilities. Meran 
established a spa commission as early as 1836, which became a formal spa ad-
ministration (Kurverwaltung) in 1855; Arco followed suit in 1872. The construc-
tion of spa pavilions, promenades, and music rooms created a visitor-oriented 
economy that grew rapidly from the 1880s onwards; where Meran had 7,000 
visitors in 1883, the number rose to 27,000 in 1909 and 40,000 five years later 
(Das Kurhaus, 1999, p. 86). 

In the countryside, it was new ‘hotel villages’ in places like Neutoblach (in 
the Puster valley) that embodied the ‘industrial’ aspect of tourism, because here 
a new settlement arose up around a grand hotel. Following the expansion of the 
southern rail route from Vienna through Carinthia, new possibilities opened up 
for tourism in the Dolomite mountains of the upper Puster valley. The Southern 
Railway Company was responsible for constructing the first grand hotel at To-
blach, which opened next to the rail station in 1878. When the leaseholders 
purchased the hotel from the company in 1887/88, a phase of expansion ensued 
around the initially isolated buildings, as ‘new’ Toblach emerged away from the 
old village (which came to be known as Alttoblach). Four further hotels were 
constructed, together with a series of smaller and larger villas; by 1914, the orig-
inal hotel had expanded to a capacity of 350 beds, possessed its own gas sup-
ply, and welcomed prominent guests including the German Crown Prince and 
composer Gustav Mahler (Heiss, 1999, pp. 23–48). 

In all these respects, ‘industrial tourism’ brought about infrastructural 
change and turned the service sector into the leading part of local economies in 
specific areas of the Tyrol-Salzburg alpine region. Centers of tourism also began 
to draw satellite villages into their orbit, as is suggested by the case of Lana near 
Meran, which burgeoned on the back of the electric tramway connection be-
tween the two places from 1906 onwards (Giovanonni, 2001, pp. 49–55). All 
these developments were widely publicized by the provincial tourism associa-
tions and presented at exhibitions across Europe and the U.S.A. (Lässer, 1989, 
p. 68). As a guide book for the American and British public produced by the 
Provincial Tourist Association in Tyrol asserted in 1906, “it is quite remarkable 
that even in the wildest and loneliest valleys and mountain fastnesses, the trav-
eller may enjoy the benefit of modern inventions, such as the telegraph and the 
telephone…. In most towns and summer- and winter-resorts, as well as in se-
lected spots high up in the mountains, there may be found hotels second to 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:24



52 | Laurence Cole, Katharina Scharf  

 

none in Europe”. Accompanying adverts from hotels throughout the province 
carefully enumerated the modern comforts that might be expected, such as 
electric light, heating, lifts, garages, the presence of a doctor, and so on (Tyrol, 
1906, pp. 9–10 and pp. 63–80).  

 While tourism in these respects transformed economic structures, it must 
nevertheless be asked how far regional society as a whole was transformed. It 
can be argued that, behind the new activities considerable social and cultural 
continuities remained, or – to be more precise – some aspects of society 
changed only very slowly, while in other areas traditions were consciously 
maintained or reinvented in a way that served tourism. Three aspects can be 
sketched out in this regard, relating firstly to nature and cultural images of the 
rural world, secondly to social relations and representations of the social order, 
and thirdly, relating to national discourse.  

 Laurent Tissot has suggested that “alpine tourism represented a conver-
gence of a set of needs, expectations, experiences, certainties and hopes that 
together helped convert the Alps into a tourist product”, which included the 
“creation of landscapes designed to enhance the beauty of the mountain set-
ting” (Tissot, 2011, pp. 4–5). In order to feed the daydreaming, expectations and 
sense of the extraordinary of the tourist gaze (Urry, 2002, pp. 2–3), nature had to 
be made accessible by infrastructure, but also to be presented – and experi-
enced – as ‘unspoilt’ and ‘authentic’, which implied a constant emphasis on the 
‘traditional’, unchanging, non-urbanized countryside. Countless British visitors 
to Tyrol believed to glimpse in the alpine countryside a world gone by, such as 
Walter White writing in 1855: “in the heart of the Continent there is much to be 
seen that sets actually before our eyes the olden time of England, such as we 
read of in the pages of histories and story-tellers” (White, 1855, p. 2). Invocation 
of romantic scenes formed a staple of travel accounts throughout the century. 
Josiah Gilbert and G.C. Churchill remarked typically of their sojourn in the Inn 
valley in 1861: “What valley can compare with this for romantic, and yet cheer-
ful, beauty – villages and castle towns on every knoll – woods sweeping up the 
slopes, and grand mountain forms above?” (Gilbert & Churchill, 1864, pp. 96–
97). Regional tourism promoters thus consciously described romantic images to 
appeal to such sentiments and desires: “beside the rigid masses of ice rising 
aloft into the sky on the gigantic mountains of the Central Alps, the fantastical 
forms of the Dolomites glow with a warm sunlight as if wrapped in a fairytale 
life of enchanting beauty. […] The whole of Tyrol appears like a gigantic castle, 
the mountains being the towers, the rocky cliffs the bastions….” (Tyrol, 1906, 
p. 4 and p. 11).  

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:24



 Alpine Tourism and ‘Masked Transformation’ | 53 

 

 If tourists came to enjoy tranquillity and naturalness, landscapes needed to 
be cultivated and perpetuated, as tourist activists in Salzburg became increas-
ingly aware in the second half of the 19th century. Lawyer, conservationist, and 
Landtag deputy August Prinzinger was a vehement advocate of the protection of 
beautiful scenery. He put forward arguments about aesthetic values, the im-
portance of nature for the education of adolescents and future generations, and 
also tourism. One important discussion revolved around the well-known 
Krimml waterfalls, still today a frequently visited tourist attraction. These water-
falls also constituted a promising energy resource, which is why some investors 
tried to apply for a licence to build a hydro-electric power station. However, due 
to Prinzinger’s stout defence of “the pearl of all waterfalls and gorges, a first-
rate natural spectacle, a glory not just for Salzburg but for whole Austria” (Salz-
burger Volksblatt, 6.04.1899, p. 9), the tourism argument won out. Thus, the – 
carefully presented – natural landscape was preserved, so that tourists could 
continue to make nocturnal visits to the illuminated spectacle, much in the 
same way that Alois Stauder in Lana (southern Tyrol) initiated the building of a 
promenade so that tourists could view the natural wonder of the Gaul ravine 
(Giovannoni, 2001, pp. 55–57).  

 Alongside the cultivation of the landscape, the marketing of the rural idyll 
further required images of a ‘pure’, traditional peasantry. The English visitor 
Henry Inglis, already writing in the 1830s, claimed: “I have already said, of the 
Tyrolese, that a more noble looking peasantry is no where [sic] to be found in 
Europe” (Inglis, 1833, p. 285). Such views provided a foundation for the subse-
quent presentation of the native population as people “who love their country” 
with their “whole heart and faithfully adhere to the old customs which have 
been handed down to them from ancient times” (Tyrol, 1906, p. 7). Referring in 
the 1920s to a phenomenon that was already prevalent before 1914, Alois Reich 
condemned outsiders who imitated a Tyrolean appearance as “saloon Tyroleans 
and mountain dandies”, and pointed out that the everyday, proud wearing of 
original costumes would be beneficial for tourism: “the picturesque clothing of 
the locals” presented “an unforgettable feast for the tourists’ eyes, which is why 
they tell everybody at home about it and return with lots of others” (Öster-
reichische Gebirgs- und Volks-Trachten Zeitung, 01.02.1926, p. 1). Innsbruck’s 
mayor Wilhlem Greil had come to a similar conclusion about the value of “tradi-
tional customs” in a revealing discussion about preparations for the centenary cele-
brations of the 1809 uprising in Tyrol. Greil had initially been sceptical about sug-
gestions to stage conservative author Karl Domanig’s turgid patriotic trilogy about 
the uprising as part of the official festivities in 1909, but he eventually agreed to its 
performance, because the peasant theatre production would have “an excellent 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:24



54 | Laurence Cole, Katharina Scharf  

 

drawing power for visitors” and would create “effective advertisement for Tyrol and 
its capital town” (cited in Cole, 2000, p. 378). 

 In practice, many promoters of tourism were involved in Heimat-oriented 
cultural associations that sought to preserve ‘traditional’ alpine customs. Mem-
bers of the Tyrolean Tourism Association helped found the Tiroler Volkstrachten-
erhaltungs- und Schuhplattler-Verein Innsbruck in 1904, which sought to revive 
folk costumes and dances (Cole, 2000, p. 391). In the same way, in several 
mountain districts in Salzburg local Volkstrachtenerhaltungs- und Schuhplattler-
Vereine as well as many similar associations arose around the turn of the 20th 

century, aiming to act as a form of tourist commodity, to preserve the “national 
fabric” of the peasantry and hence the “people” (Volk), and to encourage peas-
ant self-assurance and thereby prevent rural depopulation (Salzburger Volks-
blatt, 16.03.1911, p. 2).  

 Where this presentation of the natural landscape and the peasantry mount-
ed a ‘traditional’ façade for tourism and necessitated awareness of the dangers 
of over-development, social relations constituted a second area where the scale 
and import of tourist transformation proved contradictory. As indicated above, 
tourism created employment opportunities within a new service sector of the 
burgeoning capitalist economy, but in practice much of this development took 
place within smaller family businesses. The family business was, however, also 
a feature of the grand hotels and here too a patriarchal model predominated, 
with most of the key positions from manager to head waiter and chef in the 
hands of men. A clear hierarchy prevailed, in which the notion of service related 
more to a traditional framework of social relations, with the position of cham-
ber-maids, cleaners and the like more akin to that of domestic servants 
(Dienstboten) in the households of the nobility, bourgeoisie or wealthy farmers 
(Heiss, 1999, pp. 49–52). More research needs to be done on this aspect of tour-
ist transformation, but it seems clear that significant structural changes in the 
workplace, such as unionization or the introduction of fixed contracts, had 
limited impact in the tourist economy of alpine regions before 1914 (compare 
Cavalcanti, 2003).  

 At the same time, pre-1914 tourism in Salzburg and Tyrol was still predomi-
nantly the preserve of social elites, meaning that the style and form of transfor-
mation bore a ‘traditional’ imprint. This was particularly the case in spa towns, 
where elite tourism was the norm and the presence of the aristocracy or the 
ruling house leant a particular air to the proceedings; it also explains some of 
the nostalgia-tinged literature on the ‘golden age’ of spa towns before 1914 (as 
noted by Leonardi, 1999; Heiss, 2001). Members of the Habsburg dynasty fre-
quented places like Bad Hofgastein, while much of the early development of 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:24



 Alpine Tourism and ‘Masked Transformation’ | 55 

 

Arco occurred under the aegis of Archduke Albrecht, until his death in 1895 
(Grazioli, 1993). Moreover, many hotels consciously appealed to a traditional 
vision of the social order. At Igls in northern Tyrol, for example, the Grand Hotel 
Igler-Hof advertised its qualities not by stressing modern comforts, but by say-
ing that it was a “first class establishment in the most beautiful position”, “pat-
ronised by their Majesties Queen Wilhelmina and Queen Emma of Holland, His 
Majesty the King of Saxe, The Duke and Duchess of Connaught, The Duke and 
Duchess of Alencon and many other members of the aristocracy” (Tyrol, 1906, 
p. 70). 

In this sense, the transformative effects of modern infrastructure were tem-
pered by the attempt to reinforce established social norms. Christian Social 
politicians argued for more road-building and lower taxes on income earned by 
mountain-guides, but still adhered to an agrarian-based ideal opposed to the 
“modern ways” that certain tourists seemed to embody. In the leading peasant 
paper, the Tiroler Bauern-Zeitung, a January 1902 report sarcastically applauded 
the achievement of a certain Fräulein Kuntze from Berlin, who had just climbed 
the Schreckhorn in Switzerland with the help of two guides. The paper warned 
that such a fool-hardy undertaking should not be imitated (Tiroler Bauern-
zeitung, 31.01.1902) In short, emancipated females from the ‘irreligious’ big city 
did not fit into the patriarchal, rural world-view that the Christian Socials 
placed at the centre of their political and social programme, although such 
concerns found an echo among national-liberal bourgeois alpinists as well. In 
practice, women’s alpine activities were not infrequently greeted by caricatures 
or mocking ditties on the part of those who resented their ‘intrusion’ into the 
mountains and feared an alteration in the established gender order of the 
mountaineering world (Runggaldier, 2011, pp. 118f). Where infrastructural 
changes enabled tourism’s promoters to market the notion that “even ladies” 
could gain access to the mountain peaks, this development was simultaneously 
rejected by elitist male alpinists as a “down-grading” of climbing tours, if mem-
bers of the supposedly “weaker sex” could embark upon them (Wirz, 2007, 
p. 223).  

 If, by 1900, tourism had become generally accepted and little, if any criti-
cism of its economic benefits appeared in the Christian Social papers, there was 
nonetheless no mistaking the sense that tourism should not be allowed to 
change the basic order of the host societies in the alpine region. For example, 
the Salzburger Chronik long advocated the potential advantages of the Tauern 
railway (eventually built in 1901–1909) for the Lungau, because the expected 
tourists would bring in much money. Nonetheless, the local people would need 
to exercise self-control and abide by the tenets of holy religion (Salzburger 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:24



56 | Laurence Cole, Katharina Scharf  

 

Chronik, 23.03.1883, pp. 1f). Equally, a degree of hesitancy accompanied certain 
aspects of change, if it meant that old institutions were threatened. The ending 
of the post-coach in Mittersill in 1897, after the arrival of the local railway, im-
mediately evoked nostalgic sentiments and regrets: “The perpetual progress 
now cruelly has destroyed the intimate idyll. Hopefully the railway leads to lots 
of tourists and proves to be a blessing [...]” (Salzburger Volksblatt, 05.10.1897, 
p. 3). 

 Lastly, alpine tourism in Salzburg and Tyrol before 1914 took place within a 
nationalized political context, in which the meaning of the Alps as a national 
space and border was fiercely contested, from both the German and the Italian 
side (Cuaz, 2005; Judson, 2006; Keller, 2016). Organized nationalist activity 
represented a new phenomenon within civil society and there were significant 
organizational and personal overlaps between tourist promoters, alpine associ-
ations and nationalist pressure groups. Moreover, the transformative activity of 
alpinist groups on the landscape was unmistakable, in the form of the construc-
tion of mountain-top refuges and huts, the laying out of pathways or climbing 
trails, and the physical presence of alpine enthusiasts. If such developments are 
well documented, what requires emphasis here is that much of this new activity 
was again accompanied by the rhetoric and practices of conservation and 
preservation. Aside from the ambivalent nature of the German and Austrian 
Alpine Association itself, which warned against overly intense tourist activity, 
a key aspect of alpine discourse was the nationally driven concern to ‘protect’ 
the ‘original national character’ of the mountain landscape and its inhabitants 
(Keller, 2016).  

 Thus, the mapping and naming of territory on the linguistic border was a 
hotly disputed issue in Trentino and the southern part of German Tyrol. Nation-
al associations such as the Tyrolean People’s League (Tiroler Volksbund, found-
ed in 1905) or the German and Austrian Alpine Association produced maps 
which ‘Germanized’ names in Italian-speaking Tyrol, while tourist newspapers 
such as the Gardasee-Post sought to encourage German visitors to visit German-
owned hotels (Cole, 2000, p. 391). When members of the nationalist Gymnastics 
Association visited German language-islands in Trentino in the summer of 1907, 
violent clashes ensued with Italian nationalists near Calliano, including mem-
bers of the Trentine Alpine Association (Società Alpina Tridentina) (Judson, 
2006, pp. 151–152). One of the protagonists of those events, Edgar Meyer, was a 
member of the Tiroler Volksbund, teacher, castle-owner and artist, who special-
ized in renovating or designing ‘old-German parlours’ for restaurants and guest-
houses, which sought to preserve ‘folk interiors’ for both commercial and na-
tionalist reasons. The already mentioned Anton Kofler provides a further exam-

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:24



 Alpine Tourism and ‘Masked Transformation’ | 57 

 

ple. Secretary of the Innsbruck Chamber of Commerce and one of the driving 
forces behind the professionalization of Tyrolean tourism, Kofler was a German-
National deputy to the Tyrolean Landtag (from 1900 to 1914) and the Austrian 
parliament (1911–1918). He too was a member of the Tiroler Volksbund and saw 
the preservation of ‘German-Tyrolean’ customs and their simultaneous com-
mercial promotion for tourist purposes as part of a mutually reinforcing com-
mercial and national-political nexus (Cole, 2000, pp. 390–392). 

3 Conclusion 

Bernd Lauterbach states with regard to alpine tourism that “the outsiders bring in 
unknown and new things”, leading to both cultural contact and potential con-
flict (Lauterbach, 2010, pp. 1–5) As our discussion here has suggested, tourism 
was in many respects a conduit for transforming aspects of society and economy 
in the alpine provinces of Salzburg and Tyrol before 1914. Yet, as several re-
searchers into the phenomenon have identified, this was a process rife with am-
bivalence and contradictions, deriving from the desire to provide easy access to 
a ‘pure nature’ that nevertheless could be enjoyed alongside the comforts of 
‘modern life’. Viewing these changes from the ‘insider’ perspective suggests that 
we should be cautious in assessing the scale and nature of social and cultural 
transformation experienced by host societies in the 19th and early 20th century. 
Further research is certainly needed on places where ‘adaptive tourism’ oc-
curred and where ‘industrial tourism’ took hold, but the ‘masked’ nature of 
much of this transformation process emerges clearly from this analysis. As Mar-
tin Scharfe has suggested with regard to the specific example of mountain-top 
crucifixes, the tourist transformation of the mountain-world from the late 18th to 
20th century involved an inversion and exchange of cultural meanings at the 
same time as external material forms were maintained (Scharfe, 2007, pp. 270–
71). The alpine region of Salzburg and Tyrol changed in terms of a new prioriti-
zation of tourism and the spreading realization of its potential profitability, yet 
the transformation was in other respects contradictory, involving an emphasis 
on the preservation of cultural traditions and social relations through a conver-
gence of commercial, political and national interests. 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:24



58 | Laurence Cole, Katharina Scharf  

 

Bibliography 
Abram, R. (1999). Das Kurhaus Meran. Ein Blick in die Geschichte der Kurstadt. Lana: Tappeiner.  
Amstädter, R. (1996). Der Alpinismus: Kultur, Organisation, Politik. Wien: WUV. 
Anderson, B. M. (2012). The construction of an alpine landscape: building, representing and 

affecting the Eastern Alps, c. 1885–1914. Journal of Cultural Geography, 29(2), 155–183.  
Anderson, B. M. (2016). Alpine Agency: Locals, Mountaineers and Tourism in the Eastern Alps, 

c. 1860–1914. Rural History, 27(1), 61–78. 
Bachleitner, R. (Ed.). (1998). Der durchschaute Tourist: Arbeiten zur Tourismusforschung. Wien: 

Profil. 
Battilani, P. (2009). Vacanze di pochi, vacanze di tutti: L'evoluzione del turismo europeo (Nuova 

ed. aggiornata). Bologna: Il Mulino. 
Bedin, V. (2016). Von Hüttenwanzen, Proviantkörben und Rosshaarmatratzen : Alltag auf al-

pinen Schutzhütten. In Deutscher Alpenverein, Österreichischer Alpenverein & Alpen-
verein Südtirol (Eds.), Hoch hinaus! Wege und Hütten in den Alpen (pp.211–243). Köln: 
Böhlau.  

Benischek, E. (2002). Alle Wege führen nach Meran: Eine kulturhistorische Untersuchung der 
Meran-Reiseführer von 1850 bis zum Ende des Ersten Weltkrieges. Unpublished diploma 
thesis, University of Innsbruck.  

Böning, H. (2005). «Arme Teufel an Klippen und Felsen» oder «Felsenburg der Freiheit»? Der 
deutsche Blick auf die Schweiz und die Alpen im 18. und frühen 19. Jahrhundert.  
In J. Mathieu & S. Boscani Leoni (Eds.), Die Alpen!: Zur europäischen Wahrnehmungs-
geschichte seit der Renaissance = Les Alpes! pour une histoire de la perception eu-
ropéenne depuis la Renaissance (pp. 175–190). Bern: P. Lang. 

Bonoldi, A. (2003). Organizzazioni e sviluppo turistico: l´esperienza tirolese (1870–1914).  
In A. Leonardi & H. Heiss (Eds.), Tourism & Museum (Vol. 1). Tourismus und Entwicklung 
im Alpenraum, 18.-20. Jh. Beiträge des ständigen Seminars zur Wirtschafts- und Unter-
nehmensgeschichte in den Alpen in Neuzeit und Gegenwart (pp. 385–411). Innsbruck: 
StudienVerlag. 

Busk, R. H. (1874). The Valleys of Tirol: Their Traditions and Customs, and how to Visit Them. 
London: Longmans, Green and Company. 

Cavalcanti, M. L. (2003). Traguardi consolidati e problemi irrisolti della storia economica del 
turismo. In A. Leonardi & H. Heiss (Eds.), Tourism & Museum (Vol. 1). Tourismus und 
Entwicklung im Alpenraum, 18.-20. Jh. Beiträge des ständigen Seminars zur Wirtschafts- 
und Unternehmensgeschichte in den Alpen in Neuzeit und Gegenwart (pp. 43–81). Inns-
bruck: StudienVerlag. 

Cole, L. (2000). „Für Gott, Kaiser und Vaterland“: Nationale Identität der deutschsprachigen 
Bevölkerung Tirols 1860–1914. Frankfurt am Main: Campus. 

Cole, L. (2002). The Emergence and Impact of Modern Tourism in an Alpine Region c. 1880–
1914. Annali di San Michele, 15, 31–40. 

Cole, L. (2003). The Counter-Reformation’s last stand: Austria. In C. M. Clark & W. Kaiser (Eds.), 
Culture Wars. Secular-Catholic Conflict in nineteenth-century Europe (pp. 285–312). Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Cole, L. (2009). Echos von 1809: der Tiroler Aufstand in der britischen Erinnerungskultur des 
19. Jahrhunderts. In B. Mazohl & B. Mertelseder (Eds.), Abschied vom Freiheitskampf? Tirol 
und ‚1809‘ zwischen politischer Realität und Verklärung (pp. 295–323). Innsbruck: Wagner. 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:24



 Alpine Tourism and ‘Masked Transformation’ | 59 

 

Cuaz, M. (2005). Le Alpi. Bologna: Il Mulino.  
Deutscher Alpenverein, Österreichischer Alpenverein, & Alpenverein Südtirol. (Eds.). (2016). 

Hoch hinaus! Wege und Hütten in den Alpen (Vols. 1–2). Köln: Böhlau.  
Dirninger, C., Hellmuth, T., & Thuswaldner, A. (2015). Salzkammergut schauen: Ein Blick ins 

Ungewisse. Wien: Böhlau. 
Dopsch, H. (2011). Landes- und Regionalgeschichte in Österreich: Entwicklung – Organisation 

– Perspektiven. Blätter für deutsche Landesgeschichte, 147, 7–30. 
Gidl, A. (2007). Alpenverein: Die Städter entdecken die Alpen. Wien: Böhlau.  
Gilbert, J., & Churchill, G.C. (1864). The Dolomite Mountains: Excursions through Tyrol, 

Carinthia, Carniola, & Friuli in 1861, 1862, & 1863. London: Spottiswoode & Co.  
Giovannoni, M. (2001). „Im Schatten des Weltkurortes Meran“: Die Entwicklung des Tourismus 

in Lana. Unpublished diploma thesis, University of Innsbruck.  
Grazioli, M. (1993). Arco felix. Da borgo rurale a città di cura mitteleuropea. Arco: Il Sommo-

lago. 
Günther, D. (1998). Alpine Quergänge: Kulturgeschichte des bürgerlichen Alpinismus (1870–

1930). Frankfurt am Main: Campus. 
Haas, H., Hoffmann, R., & Luger, K. (Eds.). (1994). Weltbühne und Naturkulisse: Zwei Jahrhun-

derte Salzburg-Tourismus. Salzburg: Anton Pustet. 
Hanisch, E. (1985). Wirtschaftswachstum ohne Industrialisierung: Fremdenverkehr und sozialer 

Wandel in Salzburg 1918–1938. Mitteilungen der Gesellschaft für Salzburger Landeskun-
de, 125, 817–835. 

Heiss, H. (2001). Tourismus und Urbanisierung: Fremdenverkehr und Stadtentwicklung in den 
österreichischen Alpenländern bis 1914. In A. Niederstätter (Ed.), Stadt, Strom, Strasse, 
Schiene. Die Bedeutung des Verkehrs für die Genese der mitteleuropäischen Städteland-
schaft (pp. 217–246). Linz: Österreichischer Arbeitskreis für Stadtgeschichtsforschung. 

Heiss, H. (2002). Der Weg des ‚Elephanten‘: Geschichte eines grossen Gasthofs seit 1551. Wien: 
Folio.  

Heiss, H. (2003). Touristische Unternehmerschaft: Das Beispiel des ‚Elephanten‘ in Brixen 
1773–2001. In A. Leonardi & H. Heiss (Eds.), Tourism & Museum (Vol. 1). Tourismus und 
Entwicklung im Alpenraum, 18.-20. Jh. Beiträge des ständigen Seminars zur Wirtschafts- 
und Unternehmensgeschichte in den Alpen in Neuzeit und Gegenwart (pp. 413–435). Inns-
bruck: StudienVerlag. 

Hellmuth, T. (1994). Wirtshäuser und Palasthotels: Die Entwicklung des Salzburger Gastgew-
erbes im 19. und beginnenden 20. Jahrhundert. In H. Haas, R. Hoffmann & K. Luger (Eds.), 
Weltbühne und Naturkulisse. Zwei Jahrhunderte Salzburg-Tourismus (pp. 60–66). Salz-
burg: Anton Pustet. 

Hoffmann, R., & Luger, K. (1997). Tourismus und sozialer Wandel. In E. Hanisch & R. Kriech-
baumer (Eds.), Geschichte der österreichischen Bundesländer seit 1945 (Vol. 1). Salzburg. 
Zwischen Globalisierung und Goldhaube (pp. 168–209). Wien: Böhlau. 

Hoffmann, R. (2002). Die touristische Erschließung des Salzburger Gebirgslandes im 19. und 
frühen 20. Jahrhundert. In K. Luger (Ed.), Der Alpentourismus. Entwicklungspotenziale im 
Spannungsfeld von Kultur, Ökonomie und Ökologie (pp. 67–86). Innsbruck: StudienVerlag. 

Hoffmann, R. (2005). „Salzburg – das ist mehr als der bloße Name einer Stadt“: Salzburg 
Mythen in historischer Perspektive. In E. Brix, E. Bruckmüller & H. Stekl (Eds.), Memoria 
Austriae (pp. 265–303). Wien: Verlag für Geschichte und Politik. 

Hübner, L. (1794). Beschreibung der hochfürstlich-erzbischöflichen Haupt- und Residenzstadt 
Salzburg und ihrer Gegenden: Vorzüglich für Ausländer und Reisende nebst dem 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:24



60 | Laurence Cole, Katharina Scharf  

 

Grundrisse der Stadt, und ihres Bezirks (Aus dessen größerer Beschreibung von ihm 
selbst zusammengezogen). Salzburg: Im Verlage der Mayrischen Buchhandlung. 

Inglis, H.D. (1833). The Tyrol, with a Glance at Bavaria, in Two Volumes. Vol. I. London: Whit-
taker, Treacher & Co. 

Judson, P. M. (2006). Guardians of the Nation: Activists on the Language Frontiers of imperial 
Austria. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press. 

Keller, T. (2016). Apostles of the Alps: Mountaineering and Nation Building in Germany and 
Austria, 1860–1939. Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press. 

Kofler, A. (1951). Aus der Geschichte der Tiroler Fremdenverkehrsförderung. In H. Gerhardinger 
(Ed.), Beiträge zur Wirtschafts- und Sozialgeschichte Tirols. Tiroler Wirtschaft in Ver-
gangenheit und Gegenwart / Festgabe zur 100-Jahrfeier der Tiroler Handelskammer 
(pp. 305–331). Innsbruck: Wagner. 

Lässer, A. (1989). 100 Jahre Fremdenverkehr in Tirol. Innsbruck: Wagner. 
Lauterbach, B. Der Berg ruft – Alpentourismus und Kulturtransfer seit dem 18. Jahrhundert. In 

EGO – Europäische Geschichte Online (pp. 1–12). Retrieved from http://ieg-
ego.eu/de/threads/europa-unterwegs/tourismus/burkhart-lauterbach-der-berg-ruft-
alpentourismus-und-kulturtransfer-seit-dem-18-jahrhundert#InsertNoteID_0_marker1 
(accessed 2016/07/10).  

Leonardi, A. (1999). Der Aufstieg der österreichischen Kurorte im 19. Jahrhundert: Ein Interpre-
tationsmodell. In H. Pechlaner & K. Weiermair (Eds.), Destinations-Management. Führung 
und Vermarktung von touristischen Zielgebieten (p. 261–285). Wien: Linde.  

Leonardi, A. (2006). Die Kultur der Gastlichkeit in den südlichen Alpen: 19.-20. Jahrhundert.  
In H. Alexander & F. Mathis (Eds.), Science live. Menschen – Regionen – Unternehmen. 
Festschrift für Franz Mathis zum 60. Geburtstag (pp. 125–140). Innsbruck: Innsbruck Univ. 
Press. 

Leonardi, A. (2010). Entrepreneurial mobility in the development of the Austrian Kurorte in the 
nineteenth century. Journal of Tourism History, 2(2), 99–116. 

Leonardi, A., & Heiss, H. (Eds.). (2003). Tourismus und Entwicklung im Alpenraum, 18.-20. Jh: 
Beiträge des ständigen Seminars zur Wirtschafts- und Unternehmensgeschichte in den 
Alpen in Neuzeit und Gegenwart. Tourism & Museum (Vol. 1). Innsbruck: StudienVerlag. 

Leonardi, A. (2003). Turismo e modernizzazione economica nell´area alpina austriaca: analisi 
di alcuni indicatori quali-quantitativi. In A. Leonardi & H. Heiss (Eds.), Tourismus und 
Entwicklung im Alpenraum, 18.-20. Jh. Beiträge des ständigen Seminars zur Wirtschafts- 
und Unternehmensgeschichte in den Alpen in Neuzeit und Gegenwart. Tourism & Museum 
(Vol. 1) (pp. 227–280). Innsbruck: StudienVerlag. 

Lipp, W. (1993). Alpenregion und Fremdenverkehr: Zur Geschichte und Soziologie kultureller 
Begegnung in Europa, besonders am Beispiel des Salzkammerguts. Zeitschrift für 
Volkskunde, 89(1), 49–62. 

Luger, K. (Ed.). (2002). Der Alpentourismus: Entwicklungspotenziale im Spannungsfeld von 
Kultur, Ökonomie und Ökologie. Innsbruck: StudienVerlag. 

Mathieu, J. (2006). Geschichte der Berge: Die Alpen und die Anden in langfristiger Perspektive. 
In H. Alexander & F. Mathis (Eds.), Science live. Menschen – Regionen – Unternehmen. 
Festschrift für Franz Mathis zum 60. Geburtstag (pp. 141–155). Innsbruck: Innsbruck Univ. 
Press. 

Mathis, F. (1996). Die Erforschung des Alpenraumes in der österreichischen Historiographie. In 
T. Busset & J. Mathieu (Eds.), Histoire des Alpes = Storia delle Alpi = Geschichte der Alpen. 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:24



 Alpine Tourism and ‘Masked Transformation’ | 61 

 

Des Alpes traversées aux Alpes vécues. Vom Alpenübergang zum Alpenraum (pp. 61–67). 
Zürich: Chronos. 

Meixner, W. (1992) „Tirols langer Marsch in die Gastronomie“. Gastgewerbe als historischer 
Lernprozeß, Tiroler Heimat, 56, 143–53. 

Niederstätter, A. (Ed.). (2001). Stadt, Strom, Strasse, Schiene: Die Bedeutung des Verkehrs für 
die Genese der mitteleuropäischen Städtelandschaft. Linz: Österreichischer Arbeitskreis 
für Stadtgeschichtsforschung. 

Oberwalder, L. (2004). Franz Senn: Alpinismuspionier und Gründer des Alpenvereins. Inns-
bruck: Tyrolia. 

Paasi, A. (2010). Regions are social constructs, but who or what ‘constructs’ them? Agency in 
question. Environment and Planning, 42, 2296–2301. 

Paasi, A. (2011). The region, identity, and power. Procedia – Social and Behavioral Sciences, 
14, 9–16. 

Penz, A. (2005). Inseln der Seligen. Fremdenverkehr in Österreich und Irland von 1900 bis 1938. 
Wien: Böhlau. 

Ring, J. (2001). How the English made the Alps (Repr). London: Murray. 
Rogy, H. (2002). Tourismus in Kärnten: Von der Bildungsreise zum Massentourismus (18.–

20. Jahrhundert). Klagenfurt: Geschichtsverein für Kärnten. 
Rohrer, J. (1796). Uiber die Tiroler nebst den Vorarlbergern. Wien. 
Runggaldier, I. (2011). Frauen im Aufstieg: Auf Spurensuche in der Alpingeschichte. Bozen: 

Edition Raetia.  
Saarinen, J. (2005). ‘Destinations in change’: The transformation process of tourist destina-

tions. Tourist Studies, 4(2), 161–179. 
Sandgruber, R. (2003). Die Entstehung der österreichischen Tourismusregionen. In A. Leonardi 

& H. Heiss (Eds.), Tourismus und Entwicklung im Alpenraum, 18.-20. Jh. Beiträge des stän-
digen Seminars zur Wirtschafts- und Unternehmensgeschichte in den Alpen in Neuzeit und 
Gegenwart. Tourism & Museum (Vol. 1) (pp. 201–223). Innsbruck: StudienVerlag. 

Scharfe, M. (2007). Berg-Sucht. Eine Kulturgeschichte des frühen Alpinismus 1750–1850. Wien: 
Böhlau. 

Schmidt, A. (1990). Die Entwicklung des Fremdenverkehrs und der Fremdenverkehrspolitik im 
Bundesland Salzburg. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Salzburg.  

Spode, H. (2003). Tourismusgeschichte als Forschungsgegenstand.: Bilanz und Ausblick. 
In A. Leonardi & H. Heiss (Eds.), Tourismus und Entwicklung im Alpenraum, 18.-20. Jh. Bei-
träge des ständigen Seminars zur Wirtschafts- und Unternehmensgeschichte in den Alpen 
in Neuzeit und Gegenwart. Tourism & Museum (Vol. 1) (pp. 83–97). Innsbruck: 
StudienVerlag. 

Stachel, P. (2014). Zwischen Exotik und Vertrautem: Zum Tourismus in der Habsburgermonar-
chie und ihren Nachfolgestaaten. Bielefeld: Transcript. 

Stadler, G. (1975). Von der Kavalierstour zum Sozialtourismus: Kulturgeschichte des Salzburger 
Fremdenverkehrs. Salzburg: A. Pustet. 

Statistischer Bericht der Handels- und Gewerbe-Kammern in Bozen und Innsbruck über die 
gesammten wirtschaftlichen Verhältnisse ihrer Bezirke für das Jahr 1890 beziehungsweise 
für das Quinquennium 1886–1890 erstattet an das Hohe K.K. Handelsministerium (1894). 
Innsbruck: Verlag der Handels- und Gewerbe-Kammern in Bozen und Innsbruck.  

Stauber, R. A. (1994). Regionalgeschichte versus Landesgeschichte?: Entwicklung und Bewer-
tung von Konzepten der Erforschung von ‚Geschichte in kleinen Räumen‘. Geschichte und 
Region / Storia e regione, 3, 227–260. 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:24



62 | Laurence Cole, Katharina Scharf  

 

Steinegger, F. (1976). Die geschichtliche Entwicklung des Wintersports in Tirol. Innsbruck: 
Tiroler Landesarchiv.  

Strauß, B. (2015). „Ich weiß nicht mehr was anfangen“: Das Ehepaar Maria und Alois R. aus 
Trens. In B. Strauß (Ed.), Beiträge zur Volkskunde: Vol. 2. Höfe ohne Männer. Frauenalltag 
im Ersten Weltkrieg. Begleitband zur Ausstellung im Südtiroler Landesmuseum für 
Volkskunde vom 23.05.2015 bis 31.10.2015 (pp. 78–94). Dietenheim. 

Tissot, L. (2011). From Alpine Tourism to the ‘Alpinization’ of Tourism. In E. G. E. Zuelow (Ed.), 
Touring beyond the Nation. A Transnational Approach to European Tourism History 
(pp. 59–78). Farnham, VT: Ashgate. 

Tissot, L. (2003). Storia del Turismo e Storia Economica: Considerazioni Metologiche ed Episte-
mologiche. In A. Leonardi & H. Heiss (Eds.), Tourismus und Entwicklung im Alpenraum, 
18.-20. Jh. Beiträge des ständigen Seminars zur Wirtschafts- und Unternehmensgeschich-
te in den Alpen in Neuzeit und Gegenwart. Tourism & Museum (Vol. 1) (pp. 23–41). Inns-
bruck: StudienVerlag. 

Türkis, B. (2010). Innsbrucker Tourismusgeschichte. Innsbruck: StudienVerlag.  
Tyrol. Guide and Hotel Book 1906. Edited by the Landesverband für Fremdenverkehr in Tyrol, 

Innsbruck.  
Urry, J. (2002). The Tourist Gaze (second edition). London: SAGE Publications Ltd.  
Urry, J. (2010). Mobilities (reprint). Cambridge: Polity Press.  
Viazzo, P. P. (1990). Comunità alpine. Ambiente, popolazione, struttura sociale nelle Alpi dal 

XVI secolo a oggi. Bologna: Il Mulino. 
Vierthaler, F. M. (1799). Reisen durch Salzburg. Salzburg: Mayrsche Buchhandlung. 
Voithofer, R. (2011). „… dem Kaiser Treue und Gehorsam …“: Ein biografisches Handbuch der 

politischen Eliten in Salzburg 1861 bis 1918. Wien: Böhlau. 
White, W. (1856). On Foot through Tyrol in the Summer of 1855. London: Chapman & Hall 
Wirz, T. (2007). Gipfelstürmerinnen: Eine Geschlechtergeschichte des Alpinismus in der 

Schweiz 1840–1940. Baden: Hier + Jetzt.  

Websites and sources  
Bundesministerium für Wissenschaft, Forschung und Wirtschaft: www.bmwfw.gv.at 
Österreich Werbung: www.austriatourism.com 
Statistik Austria: www.statistik.at 

Newspapers/Journals 
Dillinger‘s Reise- und Fremden-Zeitung  
Feldkircher Zeitung 
Illustrierte Rundschau 
Österreichische Gebirgs- und Volks-Trachten Zeitung 
Salzburger Chronik 
Salzburger Volksblatt 
Tiroler Bauernzeitung  
Tiroler Stimmen 

Statutes of Associations 

Proceedings (Salzburger Landtag)  

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:24



 Alpine Tourism and ‘Masked Transformation’ | 63 

 

Bionotes 
Laurence Cole 

Laurence Cole is professor of Austrian history at the University of Salzburg, Austria. He is the 
author of a monograph on the construction of national identity in 19th-century Tyrol („Für Gott, 
Kaiser und Vaterland”: Nationale Identität der deutschsprachigen Bevölkerung Tirols 1860–
1914) [Campus, 2000]). He has worked on regional and national identities in central Europe, 
and more recently, on societal militarization. 
 

Katharina Scharf 

Katharina Scharf teaches and conducts research at the History Department at the University of 
Salzburg. She is currently working on her dissertation project – a comparative analysis of the 
transformation processes of the regions Salzburg and “Savoy” (Departments Savoie and 
Haute-Savoie) from alpine peripheries to flourishing tourism regions. Her main areas of re-
search include the history of European regions, tourism history and gender history.    
 

Bereitgestellt von | Universitätsbibliothek Passau
Angemeldet

Heruntergeladen am | 20.06.19 13:24